Closing in on planet formation

12 August 2004

An astronomer in the US has taken the sharpest ever image of the dust disk 
around a nearby star and seen "clumps" of material that could be evidence for 
new planets forming. Michael Liu of the University of Hawaii used the Keck II 
telescope in Hawaii to observe a young star called AU Microscopii, and says that 
the results could help shed light on the formation of planets (M Liu 2004 
Sciencexpress 1102929).

Astronomers believe that planets form from the dust and debris that surround 
young stars. As this material rotates around the star, gravitational forces 
cause the dust to clump together into planets. 

AU Microscopii	

AU Microscopii weighs just half a solar mass and is only the fourth star ever --
and the closest to Earth -- to have its dust disk imaged. Since 85% of all stars 
in the Milky Way are low-mass stars like AU Microscopii, observations of its 
disk may provide important clues about how the majority of planetary systems 
evolve. 

Earlier this year Liu and colleagues discovered AU Microscopii's dust disk using 
a 2.2-metre telescope. The images they obtained showed that the disk extended 
out to about 210 astronomical units from the star, where 1 astronomical unit 
(AU) is the average distance between the Earth and the Sun. 

Now, using the 10-metre Keck II telescope, Liu has obtained new images of the 
disk that are 30 times sharper. The images have an angular resolution of 0.04 
arcseconds, which means that features as small as 0.4 AUs can be distinguished. 

Liu found that the star's disk was uneven and contained clumps lying between 25 
to 40 AUs from the star. These distances correspond to the size of Neptune's and 
Pluto's orbits in our solar system. The clumps are made of dust, which may be 
shaped by the gravitational influence of newly formed planets, he says. 

AU Microscopii is about 12 million years old, which is the age at which planets 
are thought to form around stars. In contrast, the Sun is 4.6 billion years old.