Hi there folks,
	I spend one day away from the office and you people get a really
interesting discussion on illusion going ! I can't leave you alone
for more than a minute !

	I have thought about illusions and their effects for many years,
ever since I first came across AD&D techniques of handling illusion
as a different type of magery that did more damage to an indeterminate
number of people in an unspecified and internally inconsistent manner.

	The end result of all this is that I tend to view all illusion 
as mind affectting and not environment affecting. Thus an illusion
can only affect what the mind can effect.

	This limits an illusion to affecting the mind and, indirectly, the body
of the affected character. 

	That is what ILLUSION magic can affect. If the caster instead 
chooses to use light to create an image rather than directly affecting
the mind of the target, that is not illusion magic, that is light
magic. Of course a good illusionist will use both the strengthen the 
effect desired.

	There is no doubt in my mind that the mind has the ability 
to affect the body greatly. There are documented cases of death 
caused from fright. They seem to be VERY hard to induce externally
but supposedly it can be done. By the same token hypnosis is supposed
to be capable of allowing surgery to be performed on unanesthesized
patients. SO it is possible to block pain. And of course there is a
common belief in the "placebo" effect and in psychosomatic illness
and injury. The mental stretch to the concepts implied by illusion 
not that large.

	The problem with illusion is in creating a pattern of magic that
is an accurate duplication of all of the perceptions and effects
of the event the caster is trying to mimic. An illusion of a spear that
does not correctly mimic the perceptions and stimuli of a real spear
is less likely to cause the body to respond as if it had been speared.
If there is enough confusion to cause themind to reevaluate and sort
out the signals it just recieved, then the fake spear is less likely 
to do more than cause the recipient to pause.

	So one key in illusion becomes experience, the more experienced 
the caster is
the more effective their casts become. If you are in a high detail 
campaign you may want to require the caster to have rankings in each 
of the various effects they intend to use. 
	For this reason a mage can usually do a convincing illusion
of themself. Other illusions will depend on who is facing them.
A mage that casts a fighters image will do best against those
who are less famailiar with fighters and the manner in which 
they move and act.

	Another key becomes time. If the target has the time to take
in all the elements of an illusion then they will have time to see the 
inconsistentcies. Thus a quick effect is more likely to be accepted
easily.

	Saving throws are always a headache with illusion since it is never
clear what a saving throw really represents. As far as I am concerned
it is nothing more than a perception roll.  If something abnormal 
is noted about the illusion it is couched in terms that describe it
in a way consistent with how well the roll was made.

	Example:

	A person running around a corner into an illusionary wall gets to roll
a perception roll. 

	1) He makes the perception roll(barely) , realizes he is about to hit it
, and makes all the appropriate physical actions to avoid it. If he/she
hits it, there will be some damage ( assuming the mage was not a complete klutz) as the characters mind had enough input from the wall to convince him
that he ran into it. End result: a dazed person wandering around without a mark on him or
her until some bruising appears. 

	2) He fails the perception roll, he doesn't see the wall at
all, runs through it. The character still has to deal with the effects 
of the illusion trying to stimulate his mind into believing they
have run into a wall.

	3) They make the perception roll(critically) and realize the 
wall is "wrong" . DEcides to run ythrough it. The character still
has to deal with the effects of the illusion but they have an edge
on any rolls they make because of the knowledge about the wall.


	With the above as a background I would like to respond to 
some of the ideas I have been reading.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
From Bill:
>   From rule two, it follows that phantasmal armor would affect the way in
>   which the blow was struck but not physically affect the blow.  For instance>   a dagger-wielding orc facing an opponent in illusionary plate might think,
>   "hmm, my dagger won't pierce that; I'll attack someone else."  On the other
>   hand the same orc with a bastard sword might reason "he's got plate armor,
>   I better swing harder."  So it could have the opposite of the desired
>   effect.
>

I would tend to classify phantasmal armour as a simple force casting and
not an Illusion.

From Geoffrey :

>David Giridot:  I run illusions in a similar way.  "Programming" an illusion
>would be very difficult.  If the caster was controlling the illusion, s/he
>might be able to program it to respond the way it would be expected to, but
>if the illusion is to be cast and then left unattended, it would be hard to
>cover all the bases.  In some game systems it may be possible to have another
>kind of programmed illusion which is linked with a telepathy magic.  This
>sort of spell would be very difficult, but could make the illusion act the
>way the victim expected it to (like the Star Trek episode "Shore Leave").
>
>							-Jeff

I tend to think that all illusions are programmed to a greater or lesser extent
. The real key is how familiar the caster is with a given effect.
A good illusionist would have to be an expert observer ! Admittedly the 
depth of the rppogramming would be dependent on how much time and energy 
the caster put into it but it is certainly possible for a mage to cast 
an illusion of himself (as he/she views themself) that would fool 
most people and handle limited conversations.



