a world is the background created by a games master for a role-playing
game. within the constraints of the game system he is using, the
GAMES MASTER (gm) should develop his "world" in as complete and
consistent fashion as possible. this book is intended as a guide to
help achieve that end.

a "world" may be of any size. certainly not have to comprise a
whole planet. a gm's world may be as small as a single city. usually a
gm will develop a larger area . . . from a single nation up to an
entire continent. eventually you may want to work out the entire
planet - then you'll have a world in the literal sense.

outline a large area; add details in one locale at a time. a gm who
attempts to flesh out every detail of a whole continent before play
begins is likely to go quite mad before he finishes. while this may
add interest for some players. it is not recommended procedure to decide, in general, what your world will be like - but
to add detail to only a small area at a time. you'll want set your
continental outline(s) first - but if you work out one city in detail,
your players can start their adventures there and enjoy themselves
while you think about other areas. world-building is a massive job.
and enjoyable in its own right, treat it as a game; don't rush it. you
and your players will both be happier.


the first step in creating a world is to determine its basic
geography. in this section. and henceforth, we will assume that the
"world" under construction is a single continent. when you're ready to
create the rest of the planet, add more continents. keep in mind that
travel on a DragonQuest world is chancy. characters may travel by sea.
air. or magic - but commerce between continents will be very limited.
for most purposes, a one-continent world will be excellent.

first determine lines of latitude and longitude. latitude (north-south
distance from the equator) is important in determining an area's
climate (q.v.). latitude runs from zero degrees at the equator to 9o
degrees (north or south) at the poles. longitude (east- west distance
from an arbitrarily chosen prime meridian) does not affect climate on
a normal earth-type world. longitude runs from zero degrees at the
prime meridian to 18o degrees at the opposite meridian. if you need
more information about latitude and longitude, consult any atlas.

if your world is located on some thing other than a standard
earth-type planet, you will need to adopt some map-grid system other
than latitude and longitude. flat worlds may be adequately described
by an ordinary cartesian grid. ( if you mark the (0,0) point of the
grid with a huge, ruined monument, you can give your players something
to to wonder about). mapping systems for other needs are left to the
imagination of the gm. however, any world needs some kind of
mapping system, and choosing it should be your very first step.

determine the continental outline. just sketch an interesting shape on
your map grid. now and henceforth. work in pencil until you're sure
about something. features of your continent's basic shape will suggest
patterns of internal geography, and vice versa.

develop the continent's internal geography. a good first step here is
to study your atlas again. a professional world-builder would have
advanced degrees in geology, climatology. ecology, history and
political science. et cetera. you may make up for any of these you may
lack just by studying the planet on which you happen to live at the
moment. open a world atlas and continue.

you will notice, for instance. that mountain chains usually appear
fairly near coasts. this may put them straight down the middle of a
narrow continental area (i.e. central america). isolated ranges may
also be found far from shore. but on a continental scale, most
mountains seem to run along coast lines. this does not mean that all
COAST LINES are close to mountain ranges.

some mountains are or were active volcanos. designate each mountain
chain as non-volcanic. actively volcanic, or in actively volcanic.
active VOLCANOS will be discussed under climate. an inactive volcano
which changes its status can make for an interesting adventure.

once mountain chains are fixed. set the continent's drainage patterns:
rivers and lakes. in general rivers run from high (the mountains) to
low (the ocean) - but you have a lot of leeway in setting their courses.
if your continent is northerly enough to feature glaciers, these may
also be the source of small rivers due to melt runoff. observe the
river patterns in your atlas. there are many small rivers, flowing
into larger ones in a "tree" pattern. occasionally rivers will feed
lakes that have no exit - evaporation balances inflow. a lake may
have no visible input - it is fed by rainfall and by streams too small
to show on the map. however, most lakes will be "way stations" on
a river's road to the sea.

Very large rivers will modify the shape of a continent by building a
"delta" - new land composed of topsoil carried to the sea and
deposited there. the mississippi is an example. in other areas a river
may appear to carve a notch in the continental outline at its mouth;
observe the amazon. you may lead your main rivers to appropriate spots
on the outline you've already drawn, or change the outline to
accommodate the rivers.

Areas of swamp and desert may now be added. swamps are located as are
lakes - a lake. in the course of years, turns into a swamp before it
dries. while the popular image of a swamp is hot and steamy. it may be
in any area where water doesn't stay frozen year-round.

a desert is an area devoid of water. it is not a mere expanse of sand;
many great deserts have no "sand dunes" whatsoever. a desert is
created by a scarcity of rainfall. if your world is a dry one, deserts
may appear often. in a wetter world, deserts will likely be found
only where : high mountain range blocks the prevailing wind from moving
inland with moisture-bearing clouds - thus creating a lush spot along
the seacoast, separated from the inland desert by a mountain chain. in
such an area, rainfall in the mountains themselves may produce a river
which flows into the desert itself, tracing a line of greenery through
the desolation until it flows into more hospitable country or dries up
entirely.

the overall "lay of the land" for remaining areas must then be
determined. areas may be table-flat, covered with rolling hills, or
anything in between. hilly areas may be the foothills of mountain
ranges - or the only remnants of the mountains themselves. truly flat
areas - which may become plains if climate allows - are most often
found in the interior of continents. another terrain type is the
"badlands" - areas where erosion has produced elaborate, beautiful. and
nearly impassable hills and mesas.

undersea terrain may also be added. if part of your world is an island
archipelago, or if you are designing a complete planet, you will want
to determine undersea terrain as well. this terrain will be populated
by merfolk, nixons. and other undersea intelligences. and will have a
complete aquatic ecology of its own.

as a rule, undersea terrain will be less varied than that found above
the water. most continental areas will have a "continental shelf," a
fairly shallow area to:ich then slants off rapidly to the mid-ocean!ic
depths. except: where currents wash it clean, the sea floor is largely
covered with ooze which masks minor irregularities. but the center of
the ocean may contain great undersea mountains. 'an g es tperhaps a few
of the peaks may reach the surface to be seen as islands?. there may
also be great deeps - trenches bottoming out at great depths, as
fearful and mysterious to the merfolk as earth's deepest cavern is to
surface dwellers.

most merfolk will live in water only fifty to a hundred feet deep -
see city location, below. therefore, a gm who wants an extensive
mid-oceanic civilization should opt for shallow waters.

when a gm's world grows to planetary size, many variations become
possible. any DragonQuest be more or less "earth like,"
because only on such worlds can humans survive unprotected. but a great
variety is possible among EARTH LIKE planets. size is quite variable,
with or without an accompanying change in gravity. the amount of land
area can be very great or very small. a world might be 90% ocean,
within continent larger than great britain or it might be 90% land.
basically a single continent with a few large, salty lakes. it is
suggested that the game master start by creating a world that is
relatively EARTH LIKE, and later graduate to more arcane variations.
creating a truly believable and truly alien world is the province of
the skilled science fiction writer - gm are referred to the works of
Poul Anderson and Hal Clement for some excellent examples.

a world of planetary size might not be a planet. entire books could be
- and have been - written on this subject, here we will simply name a
few possibilities. in the realm of science. gigantic structures have
been postulated as substitutes for planets. larry niven's ringworld
(q.v.) is only. a still lar8er construct, the "dyson sphere." would
totally surround a sun with a hollow shell; rhe inhabitants wou-j be
on the inside. both these constructs are many orders of magnitude
larger than a 8inple planet- no game master could ever completely work
out of populate a ringworld except in the scantiest detail, and no
group of players are likely to need an area even a hundredth that
lar8e in which to work out their destinies.

another science-fiction concept is the the "generation ship" . a giant
starship with a self-contained ecology, moving slowly from star to
star. it would be possible to place a DragonQuest world in such a
ship, though the seasonally aspected characters would probably suffer.
rationalization of a magic system on such a starship is
left to any gm who cares to attempt it.

moving to strictly fantasy concepts. a flat world either tightly
bounded, with an edge off which you can fall. or absolutely unending
is a possibility. a flat world could also be shaped like a mobius
strip - since it would only have one side, it would be impossible to
fall off, and anyone ' who made it "around the edge" would have
achieved an interesting short cut. (I'll leave the subtleties of
the klein-bottle world to the arcane geometers among you.) Philip Jose
Farmer's "world of tiers" also presents interesting possibilities to a
fantasy cartographer.


local geographical features must be added for each area as it comes
into play. when you design your continent it is enough to say that
"this area is mountainous; here is where the river runs." when a
detailed map of a particular area is made. you will need to show where
each mountain lies. where the river can be forded, et cetera. this
will be covered more fully under local maps (q-v.)

the second step in constructing a world is to determine patterns of
climate. factors to consider will include latitude, seasonal
differences, prevailing winds.

latitude is the most important factor in climate. refer to the table
bel0w to determine the "average" temperature for each latitude.
"average." always a shaky term) here signifies the median outdoor
daytime temperature for the area in spring or fall.

degrees of latitude            average temperature

zero (equator)                  100 degrees f. +/* 10
10                              90, +/- 10
20                              80. +/- 15
30                              70, +/- 20
40                              60, +/- 20
50                              45  +/- 25
60                              30, +/- 30
70                              15, +/- 30
80                               0, +/- 35
90 (poles)                       0. +/- 40

in general, the farther you go from the equator. the colder the
average temperature, and the greater the ranee into which temperatures
may fall.

another factor affecting the range of temperature is the distance of
an area from the ocean. ranges given above assume that an area is
neither on the coastline nor in mid-continent. oceans greatly reduce
the temperature range in nearby areas of land. a shore area (at any
latitude) will have a temperature range 10 to 20 degrees less than the
average given. an area in the center of a large c0ntinent, far from
sizeable bodies of water, may have a t6mperature range 20 to 30
degrees in excess of those cited.


seasonal temperature differences depend on a planet's axial tilt. if
your planet has no axial tilt, it will have no seasons. (it will also
be with0ut solstices and equinox es. which will work a terrible hardship
on seasonally aspected characters.j the greater a planet's axial tilt,
the more difference their will be in its seasons. (the earth axial
tilt, for comparison, is 23.i degrees.7 seasonal differences ave
greatest at a planet's poles and least at its equator. any
generalization about degree of seasonal differences is going to be
false. a workable rule of thumb for seasonal differences: average
winter temperature for a given latitude will be average spring
temperature minus half the range given. average summer temperature
will be the average spring temperature plus half the range given. in
general, the temperature of a land area will vary more throughout a
given day than its average temperature varies throughout the
seasons of the year.


The direction of the prevailing winds should be determined. a
world-builder may do this pretty much as he pleases. overall weather
patterns tend t0 move from the poles ' toward the equator, but the
prevailing pattern over a smaller area may run in any direction - or
no standard direction. choose a direction at random - or. after
reading this part. choose a direction that interacts with terrain
features to produce interesting effects.



the interaction of winds with terrain features will have a great effect
on climate. as mentioned above, a mountain range which blocks
rain-bearing winds may create a desert. in general, whenever winds
pass over a large body of water and then over land, they will ?ick up
moisture from the water and distribute it as rainfall1. the larger the
body of water and the stronger the wind, the far he farcher this
effect reaches.

average; rainfall for each major area should be determined. some
determinants of rainfall have already been discussed. others ti.e.,
proximity to the ocean) are fairly obvious. assign an average yearly
rainfall from the table below to each area.

annual rainfall     general terrain     probability of rain
in inches                type             on any given day
10                       desert                2/100
20                       dry                   8/100
30                       moderate             12/100
40                       fertile              12/100
60                       verdant              25/100
80                       wet                  50/100
100 and up               miserable            bo/100

"terrain type" above is only a rough indicator. "probability of rain"
is discussed in the next section.

climate is what you expect; weather 15 what you get, climate patterns
are only a rough guide to the actual weather of an area. you may, for
example, have located the city of preldibar at latitude 30, which you
figure gives it an average temperature of 65. it's on the seacoast,
which you decide moderates its average range (normally 20 deg at
that latitude) to 10. the prevailing wind is from the east, off the
ocean. so what's the weather like today in preldibar?

you won't need to determine this when you create the world - indeed,
you can't. but when a group of players makes it to preldibar. you'll
want to tell them whether they need skis, galoshes, or sun-hats.

normal weather can be described, oost of the time, by stating the
temperature and adding a description of what of water tif any) is
falling from the sky. (magical weather is a different matter and is
treated later on.)

to determine weather. a gm should use the two tables below.

rainfall: use table xkxx (above) to determine the probability that it
rains on the first day a party is in an area after that, base each
day's chance of rain on the one before as follows:

desert areas 10 inches/year or less;

roll anew for rain each day, regardless of the previous day's
rainfall.

moderate climates greater than 10 and less than 50 inches/year):
if yesterday was clear: 80% clear, 18% rain, 2% storms.
if yesterday was rainy: 50% clear. 40% rain. 10% storms.
if yesterday was stormy: 50% clear. 25% rain, 25% stormy.

wet climates (20 or more inches per year):
if yesterday was clear: 50% clear, 40% rain, 10% storms.
if yesterday was rainy: 20% clear, 60% rain, 20% storms.
if yesterday was stormy: 20% clear. 20% rain, 40% storms.

the above table is very simple. complexity may be added
as desired, but in its present form it will provide a
satisfactory variety of weather.  "storms" mean heavy
rainfall (or, in a cold area,  snowfall).

temperature:

each day's temperature is based on the temperature of the day before.
for the starting day, use the average temperature of that area for the
season then prevailing.

if characters stay in an area long enough for the seasons to change,
use the solstice or equinox as the starting date of the new seasons
average temperature -

if yesterday's       chance of      chance of     chance of
temperature was:     staying same   5" decrease   5" increase .

20" or more
above average           10%            85%            5%
15  above average       15%            80%            5%
10  above average       20%            70%           10%
 5  above average       30%            20%           20%
    average             50%            25%           25%
 5  below average       30%            20%           20%
10  below average       20%            10%           70%
15  below average       15%             5%           80%
20  or more
below average           10%             5%           85%

Once again, this is a very simple chart. Note that neither of these
charts allows for magical intervention.

whenever the weather is stormy. there is a chance of a severe storm.
usually, there is about a 20% chance that a storm is "severe." a gm may
modify this chance as he or she sees fit. the effects of an ordinary
storm are not catastrophic; such a storm merely drops an inch or two
of water or snow and goes on its way. a "severe" storm will be a
minor, or perhaps major, disaster. presenting problems for the players
(and opportunities for them to become heros) the gm may pick the
severe storm from the list below, using whatever means seem
appropriate. factors to be considered will be location, season, and
temperature.

windstorm. may occur anywhere at any time. a windstorm drops little or
no rain. but its high winds may destroy small buildings. characters
caught in a windstorm without shelter will take d-4 of damage each
ten minutes due to flying objects and will lose d-4 of fatigue each
ten minutes. in addition, movement rates are halved in the storm.

snowstorm. temperature must be below freezing. a character caught in a
snowstorm without shelter will take d-4 of damage and fatigue each
hour. this is doubled if the temperature is below freezing. damage
from a snowstorm or any other cold storm will be multiplied by
at least 3 if the characters were not, in the gm's opinion, properly
prepared with clothing. et cetera, to counter its effects. a snowstorm
may also have high winds - if so, add the "windstorm" effects.
march rates are halved in a snowstorm.

hailstorm. as a snowstorm but the precipitation is in the form of ice
or freezing rain. march rates are quartered in a hailstorm. however,
almost no living being in its right mind will venture out (or believe
that anyone else would) in such weather.

sand storm. a windstorm in or near a desert, where it has picked up a
load of sand and dust. effects are as a windstorm, but doubled. small
objects dropped during a SAND STORM will not be found again without
magical help, if a character becomes lost during a SAND STORM, he or
she is likely to be found ,smothered by the sand,when weather clears.

tornado. this is a highly localized windstorm: effects are nil if you
are more than 1/2 mile from the tornado. within 1/2 mile of its path,
effects are like those of a windstorm. any character who has the
misfortune to be on the tornado's narrow (200-400 yards wide) path
will probably not be heard from again. there is an 80% chance that
he/she will simply vanish. a 15% chance of 3dl0 of damage, a 4% chance
of 1d10 of damage, and a 1% chance that at the character will be
transported some distance and put down unhurt. tornadoes can be seen
and heard for a great-distance; they usually move in a straight line
at from 10 to i0 mph. any building hit by a tornado, except a pyramid
or similar solid block of masonry, will be wrecked or completely
obliterated.

hurricane. as far as the characters of a dragonquest world
are concerned, a hurricane is a severe windstorm. the only difference
is that, if they are under the "eye" of the hurricane, it will seem to
vanish. giving them from one to three hours of clear weather - and
then return, reaching full force within five minutes!

earthquakes and VOLCANOS are not weather; they have nothing to do
with storms. they are geological. rather than meteorological, events;
they may occur in any climate. a gm may determine that an area is
earthquake or volcano prone. in 90 % of the cases the natives will be
aware of this and will know what to do the rest of the time they will
be just as unnerved as the players. severity of these phenomena is
entirely up to the gm.

the third step in world-building is the determination of manography .
. . the degree and quality of available mana in each locale. mana is
the stuff of magic, it is a type of energy not native to our
dimension. it "leaks through" in various locations, providing the
power by which adepts ply their trade. manography is the study of the
physical location of mana.


the strength of the available mana in an area may be described by a
number from 1 to 10. zero is the bottom of the scale; ten is the top.
previous dragonquest rules have referred to areas of "low mana" and
"high mana" an area may simply be mapped in terms of low. medium, and
high mana. ii descriptive numbers are used. mana levels 0-5 are "low."
and levels 9 and 10 are "high."


mana level                           descriptio;

0                  magic is impossible. magic items work with a 50%
                   efficiency and a 50% chance of self destruction
                   at each use.

1                  magic very difficult. add -30% to all
                   base chances. magic items work with reduced
                   efficiency. backfire impossible.


2                  magic difficult. add -20% to all base
                   chances. magic items work normally.

3                  magic somewhat difficult. add -10% to all
                   base chances.

4-5                magic is no bore difficult than usual.
                   however, there will be few or no adepts
                   native to the area. no magical creatures
                   will be found.

6                  occasional stunted varieties of magical
                   creatures will be found.

7                  magical creatures of all types are found

8                  dragonquest worlds. on average. 80 to 90%
                   of the area of your world should be at
                   level 7 or 8.

9                  high-mana environment. add l0% to the
                   base chance for all spells cast.

10                 very high mana environments
                   add 30% to base chance of spells. such
                   are rare and, as will be seen below,
                   may be dangerous.

a manographic map shows " contour lines" giving the strength of mana
in various areas. often mana radiates outward from a single small
point. a building might have a mana of 10, with its courtyard having a
level of 9, the land for a day's march around having a mana of 0, and
the rest of the shire having a level of 7.

any adept will have a good general idea of the mana level 0f any area
as soon as he enters it. were it not for the fact that occasionally
(for instance) a mana 9 area is adjacent to a mana 7 area, adepts would
almost always know the exact mana level of the area they are in.

any adept has a 5 * ma chance of immediately sensing the change when
he crosses a boundary between areas with different mana levels. he
will always know whether the is from higher to lower or vice versa.

any adept also has a 4 * ma chance of correctly sensing the exact mana
level of an area if he concentrates. undisturbed, for one minute.
should he be mistaken. he will1 only miss by one mana levei, the gm
determines randomly the direction of error. an adept may only try this
once per day in any given place

any adept has the same chance of determining the celestial aspect of
a place in the same way (if that place has an aspect). however no adept
will be aware of the existence of an aspect unless he/she cakes a
minute to concentrate.

adepts have no especial ability to sense emotional aspect


an area with a mana level of 9 or 10 may be aspected just as
characters are aspected. since human sacrifice is often used to draw
mana. most aspected high-mana areas will be death-aspected. other
aspects are possible. a life- aspected area will sometimes be found;
such areas are often used as temples of pagan religions. if, through
natural or magical means) the sun shines daily on a spot but the moon
never does, that spot will become sun-aspected if its  mana is high
enough. the reverse process will cause an area to take on a lunar
aspect. very rarely, a spot may have a seasonal aspect.

a death-aspected place affects all characters as though a human had
just died there. a life-aspected place affects all characters as though
an (unrelated? human had just been born. solar-aspected places have
the effect of noon; lunar-aspected places have the effect of midnight.
a place with a seasonal aspect has the effect of midnight on an
ordinary night when its stars are ascendant. these effects are for an
aspected plate with a mana level of 9. if the mana level is 10. double
al1 these effects. all effects are cumulative with other factors
concerning magic, et cetera.

an area with a mana strength of 9 or 10 may also carry an emotional
aspect. this may be instead of or in addition to its normal aspect.

an "emotional aspect" is a feeling of emotion engendered in al1 living
being which enter that place. magical theoreticians believe that it is
caused by mana leakage from specific other-dimensional spots whose
inhabitants are feeling a strong emotion. if a place experiences mana
leakage from the native plane of a demon. for instance. it might
become charged with anger. hate. sadism. or simple hunger.


a place carrying an emotional aspect will always have a "reputation"
among local people. and may very well be the focal spot for religious
and/or magical ceremonies.

where players approach an area with an emotional aspect, they should
be informed that they are beginning to feel angry or happy. or
whatever.) aspected areas will, of course. affect non-player
characters, animals, and monsters. the gm is responsible for
determining and applying these effects as he sees most fit.

many sorts of emotion and quasi-emotion are possible; the gm should be
inventive. some possibilities include

hunger, hatred, amusement,happiness,combativeness,lust,
competitive ness, madness, destructive ness,studious ness, disgust
stupidity, friendship, self-sacrifice.

some sorts of emotional aspect will have measurable effect on
factors of play. the aspect of lust, for instance. will increase the
fertility of those who live therein. the aspect of STUDIOUS NESS will
reduce by 20% the time required to learn anything. if all studying is
done in that place 50% if the mana level is 10 instead of 9). and so
on.

various combinations of regular aspect and emotional aspect may
produce interesting results. a place aspected to both life and lust
would tend to attract fertility rites. a place aspected to death and
lust would draw certain of the less attractive demons. a place
aspected to sun and DESTRUCTIVE NESS might draw fire-worshippers;
aspects of moon and madness would draw (or produce) literal lunatics.
be creative.

an area with a mana strength of 9 0r 10 may be subject to mana
weather. mana weather. or magic weather- is the - overall term for a
class of mana phenomena often encountered in high-mana areas. there
are a number of different kinds of mana weather, described below.
there is a 3% chance that any given level 9 area will experience one
kind of mana weather on any given day. and a 1% chance that it will
experience two kinds. double these chances for level 10 areas:
double-them-again for areas that have no aspect or emotional aspect.
if two kinds of mana weather are experienced, the second will not
begin until the first has ended.

determ.ine starting time for the phenomenon by roiling d100 and
dividing it by 4. re roll anything > 24. read this as a time. 1 is 1
a.m. and 3 is 3 a.m. 13 is 1 p.m. and so on. determine the type of
mana weather by rolling d100 and checking the percentage chances liven
for each type of weather, weather will always extend over the whole
high-mana area and will cease abruptly at its edge.

1-8. hot hail. looks and acts like hail, but boiling hot.
does d-4 damage each minute to unprotected beings. and can set fire to
flammable objects. lasts 2d10 minutes. if hot hail is caught in a
bottle, and the bottle sealed it will worth 500 silver pennies per
ounce to an alchemist if delivered within four days of its falling.

9-11. rain of flame. insubstantial flames fall from the sky, doing d-3
damage per minute to solar-aspected beings double that to all others.
lasts 1d10 minutes.

12-15. spelldust.a rain of sparkling. multicolored dust. lasts 1
minute, and vanishes. its effects are random, but usually troublesome.
roll 1d100 for each character. on a 1-50, he suffers one effect of the
damned minatum. on a 51-75, he falls unconscious for two hours,
dreaming happily. and awakens with all fatigue points recovered. on a
76-100, the sleep lasts 24 hours, and the character awakes with all
fatigue and endurance points recovered. if a character wishes to avoid
breathing the dust, he/she must roll his endurance or less on 1d100.

16-25. solid fog. lasts 1dl0 hours. grayly translucent. it impedes
movement; all movement (of any kind) is at half speed. missile
weapons become unusable, except for flaming arrows. solid fog boils
away and vanishes instantly within six feet of any fire or flame, so
torch-holding characters may proceed normally.

26-30. static. sparks and glowing witch-fire appear constantly.
lasting d-1 hours. a nuisance: animals are skittish, and spells may
misfire due to the uncontrolled discharge of mana. add -20% to base
chance for any spell. static can also cause very flammable objects or
compounds to explode ( 5% chance).

31-40. rain of frogs. lasts 2d10 minutes. thousands of tiny frogs or
snails, or lizards. or other beasts fall from the sky. no effect
except to slow travel slightly and irritate everyone concerned   

41-50. rain of blood. the sky literally rains blood for d10 minutes.
this is generally considered an evil omen. life- and death-aspected
characters are affected -30% and +30% respectively, on all magical
chances while the rain continues.

51-60. unnatural light/darkness. if it is daytime, the sun will appear
to go out: if it is night, there will be full daylight. though with no
visible sun. lasts d-2 hours.

61-65. glowing fog. green-glowing vapor, lasting for 1d10 hours.
glowing fog totally nullifies infravision of all kinds. visibility
during this event, whatever the time of day, is equivalent to human
vision at dusk for all creatures.

66-70 windstorm: identical to a natural windstorm. lasting d-2 hours.

71-75. heat. temperature rises one degree per minute for 1d100
minutes, chen falls at 5 degrees per minute back to its previous
value. this is air temperature only - water will provide some relief

76-80. cold. as above, but temperature falls,  then rises.

81-90. exhiliration. all character5 will feel unaccountably cheerful.
add 20 to each reaction0n roll in a level 9 area, of 40 to each roll if
a level 10 area. lasts d10 hours.

91-100. depression. as above, but reversed. subtract 20 from reaction
rolls if a level 9 area, or 40 from reaction rolls in a level 10
area.

by the practice of group magic, adepts can suppress or prevent mana
weather. this is often necessary in a high- mana area which houses a
temple or similar facility. see the section on group magic for a full
explanation.

manography can change, though abrupt changes are very rare. a
high-mana area can, over a period of time, become a low-level area.
the aspect of a place may chance, or its emotional aspect may alter.
these changes are largely up to the cm, but should not be
quick ones.

the laws governing mana enrichment and depletion are not known. in some
cases, centuries of magic practiced in an area tend to deplete the
mana (cf. Larry Niven's the magic goes away). in other cases, mana
appears to remain constant or even increase, despite constant use. it
appears that magic practiced on this plane does not have a consistent
or humanly-logical effect on the mana-sources located on other planes.
this means that a referee may make his own decisions as to long-term
mana chances in an area, and does not have to be consistent unless he
wants to. he may make his own rules (with or without informing the
players) - or he may make no rules at all. there are some things man
was not meant to know-

the one known method of increasing an area's mana level is human
sacrifice. this is one of the things man was not meant to know - but
he found out anyhow. ritual human sacrifice. repeated over months or
years, will increase the mana level of a place. this produces what is
known as "un hallowed" or "dark" ground. high-mana areas produced in
this way are always death-aspected.

for each victim killed in a ritual fashion - either as part of another
magical rite. or just as a sacrifice to the dark powers there is a 1%
chance that the area's mana will increase by 1 due to the attraction
of demonic forces. this chance is cumulative as long as sacrifices are
no closer than a week together. nor farther apart than a month. if
more than a month passes between sacrifices, or if a mana level
increase is actually attained, the cumulative chance of a further
increase is set back to zero. but may start over.

any increase gained in this fashion will affect an area d10 yards in
diameter. if several increases are eventually attained, roll
separately for each increase; this will likely produce a typical
concentric manographic pattern.

the increased mana level thus attained will remain as long as at
least one human sacrifice per two months. or one animal sacrifice per
week. is made. if the requisite sacrifice is not made, the mana level
may drop in whatever fashion the gm likes.
