Jim Jackl-Mochel
From:	Alexander M. Jackl [ajackl@avs.com]
Sent:	Thursday, January 08, 1998 4:31 PM
To:	Jim Jackl-Mochel
Cc:	Alexander M. Jackl
Subject:	Re: Menahan Deathknight questions

-----Original Message-----
From: Jim Jackl-Mochel <jmochel@foliage.com>


>Menahan will peel the Heimdellian church onion until I find someone that
can
>describe to me the attributes of a Deathknight. What magic or physical
>attributes they have, etc.. Is there weapon typically  a vorpal blade and
so on.

Okay.  Death Knights are very high-level undead that have the
intelligence(or greater) of a human being.  They are almost always high
level Paladins of Arken that have become undead.   They have a minimum PCF
of 50 and can get as high as 150.  Their DVF is at least 15.   They tend to
have low Agility, high Aura, very high Strength, and very very high Drives.
Everything else is normal.

As such they are capable of Divine Gifts as a living Paladin that vary from
Paladin to Paladin.  Typical Arken Gifts:

Draw Life
Death Fire
Protection Vs. Life
Regenerate
Command
Shadow Walk

As undead they have Dark Sight as a natural skill, and have no system shock.
They are immune to normal weaponry, and can be harmed by light-and
fire-based metals(gold, silver, platinum, copper), natural
weapons(tree-limbs, wooden spears) and magical- or divinely-enhanced
weapons.   They are as vulnerable to magic as anyone else but have
unbelievably high Magic Defenses and Saves.  They can be turned by the same
rules as any supernatural creature and are effected by sunlight- though they
are more  immune to sunlight than the Lethar....

Some Death Knights have extensive sorcery skills, none are Wizards.  They
all are fighters.

As a rule they disdain missile weapons, though are willing to and are not
stupid about this.   They tend to wear pre-Feudal plate and use Feudal
weapons but of immensely high quality.  Highly magic armor and
almost-artifact class weapons are the rule not the exception.  They tend not
to carry vorpal blades, unless they are Nazgul.

Nazgul are the highest leadership of the Death Knights.

 They tend to be high skilled tacticians and strategists and have high
leadership skills.

They hold a powerful political place in the hierarchy of the Arkenites.