Jim Jackl-Mochel
From:	wall@amt.tay1.dec.com
Sent:	Thursday, February 12, 1998 1:06 PM
To:	jmochel@foliage.com
Cc:	ajackl@avs.com
Subject:	Time Line (Alex, slightly revised) 

Dates are Day/Year, where Year 1 = Game Year Vardigan began running.  I do not
know, in the cosmic scheme of things, what year that was.

226/1	Vardigan, Erak, and Mala leave the rest of the party.

227/1	Some rivers forded, one of them pretty substantial.  The hills begin
	to get steeper about halfway through the day, and they see snow and
	mountains, and a firehawk heading west.  Otherwise a quiet day.

228/1	They enter the mountains, talking a good deal about Mordanith and his
	motives.  The party leaves a mark to indicate their passage.
	They encounter a party of Gherka herders.  The night is very
	cold, and Erak has heard tales of ghosts in the mountains.

229/1	The sunrise that morning is strange.  A man they encounter explains
	this is due to the action of the Firelord, and informs them the desert
	is to the east.

230/1	Press on.  Nothing of significance.

231/1	Somewhere, Mordanith and the others are performing their ritual.  The
	sunrise loses its strange quality.

232/1	They stop early in a valley.  A snow creature attacks in the evening.
	Vardigan breaks his scimitar in the fight.

233/1	A day of travel.

234/1	They follow a pass east, past the site of an avalanche.  They pass
	a place where the heads of snow creatures are mounted on poles.  From
	an escarpment, they can see the desert.  They follow the trail to a set
	of 8' steel doors.  This is the entrance to the home of the Gatekeepers
	of The Qeroshae, and they invite Vardigan and Company in.  There's a
	lot of talk about current events, culminating in a discussion of
	journeying to a city in the desert called Qasiradam, and something they
	call The Raising of The Dragon.  A man called Nadi will guide them
	part way, and teach them some of the local language.

235/1	The Gatekeepers provide aid and provisions, including the repair of
	Vardigan's scimitar.  The party descends to the desert.  At a resting
	place, they encounter a Red Sash Assassin, who has apparently been
	dispatched to kill Vardigan.  Vardigan kills the assassin, and takes
	his head for probable payment of a bounty.  The party divides up the
	assassin's possessions.

236/1	Descend further.  The terrain is becoming less rocky.  Nadi is teaching
	a language called Qassari, and some basic rules of behavior in the
	desert.  We come to an oasis in a village.  The head man is called
	Ozar, who asks if we are magicians, and what brings us to the desert.
	He later brings out his grandfather, Odi, and the aprty receive the
	hospitality of the village.  There's an extended discussion about
	swapping the horses for camels, but Vardigan is not interested.  He
	does secure a 4-legged, desert relative of a Gherka for a pack animal.

237/1	Travel into the desert, leaving rocky areas behind.  Begin sleeping by
	day, traveling at night.  They see a great many shooting stars.

238/1	The party encounters a lone man of advanced age in ragged clothes.
	They discuss this event, the Rising of the Dragon, and its possible
	connection to a holy book:

		"Three will come from the north.  A man of power
		 will bring a key and open the gates, so that
		 the Sun Blade may enter and raise the dragon."

	This upsets Nadi.  Our visitor calls himself Bel, and advises they
	seek out a man called Kofi and tell him 'the hourglass has turned.'
	Bel also has some information about Red Sash Assassins, but Nadi
	continues to dislike him.

	After pressing on, Nadi points out an ancient fortress once occupied
	by wizards.  They pass what might be a caravan, animals drawing carts
	on runners.

239/1	Another oasis.  The caravan is here claiming the water is bad, and
	the party gives up some to avoid trouble.

240/1	The party reaches a set of pillars and turns due east, heading into
	deep desert.  Nadi describes a set of landmarks.  Lightning arcs from
	a nearby hill, striking Vardigan, and people come swarming out of the
	sands.  The party is attacked by a wizard, but a second one named
	Tafir comes.  He identifies our attacker as a Lord of Light Or
	Darkness.  Tafir is a warden in this area.  He bids us farewell and
	moves off, and shifts shape just before he disappears.

241/1	The terrain grows rocky again as they reach a town with a well.
	Vardigan passes out from his wounds, and has to be tended.  He
	overhears discussions that the person who attacked is searching
	for an artifact in holy places in the desert.

242/1	Vardigan continues his recovery.  Juggles some for a village audience.

243/1	The party moves on.  They see lights and chanting that Nadi
	speculates is a funeral.


244/1	Quiet travel day.

245/1	Bad travel day.  The party comes on a Quatu camp.  Quatu are nomadic
	desert dwellers.  The Quatu come out and demand to know what the party
	is up to, and eventually the party is sent on its way.

246/1	Spend time at a well, seeing a caravan and blue flickers of light that
	Nadi cannot identify.

247/1	In the light of false dawn, a desert walker passes.  Nadi identifies
	this as a sort of undead.  They come upon a small camp and a village,
	where everyone is dead.  The dead start walking, and the party flees.
	Eventually, the party reaches Qasiradam and begins looking for Kofi.
	They are apprehended by Sultan's guards, who on learning their
	business brings them to Kofi.  Kofi turns out to be a dwarf.

	Pass the evening at Kofi's house.  He has information about the dragon,
	a force bound by wizards.  Knowledge of it lost in the purge of
	Abjurationists.  He would like the party to speak to a wise man.
	When leaving, the party sees a figure with very long fingers in the
	darkness.

248/1	The day passes quietly.  That evening, the party returns to Kofi's
	for dinner and to meet with the wise man.  There is discussion of
	desert walkers before the wise man arrives.  He is old and very
	withered.

	A discussion of possible connection between the man looking for
	artifacts and the Firelord.  The wise man speaks of a man of air,
	which the party takes to be Mordanith.  Discussion of whether
	Morphus is still alive.  The wise man asks if Vardigan has come to
	raise the dragon.  Vardigan doesn't know.  The wise man, known as
	The Wisdom Of The Desert, says:

		"You are the path, not the walker.  That which
		 cannot be seen can be seen in that which is twice.
		 Your answer may not be here.  Follow gray sand in
		 a sandstorm.  What they seek is not important."

	More talk, and the sharing of a water pipe.  Kofi advises the
	captain of the Sultan's guard will be on the lookout for
	foreigners, fearing spies.  This discussion is interrupted by
	a disturbance.  Vardigan and Erak pursue and slay two of the
	Sultan's spies.  They agree to meet Kofi again in six days time
	in the desert, where the party saw the tribes gathered.

249/1	Storm breaks out of his stall and leads people a merry chase.
	This commotion attracts the captain of the guard, and Vardigan
	is arrested, but before he can be led off a woman in black attacks,
	bristling with weapons.  Vardigan dismembers her.  She is identified
	as some flavor of witch, and Vardigan is asked to say nothing.

	The commotion with Storm is sorted out, and Vardigan is summoned to
	the presence of the Sultan.  Nadi mentions that the tribes have tried
	to take Qasiradam in the past.  On the way to the Sultan's palace,
	Vardigan passes two Red Sash Assassins, but there is no trouble.
	He's brought to a chamber with minstrels by a dapper man.  The Captain
	of the Guard comes.  Eventually, a man with a thick black beard, the
	third son of the Sultan, comes out.  He holds the title Peacekeeper.
	Vardigan mentions seeing the massed tribes.  Things go black.

	Vardigan has a dream about leading his people against a massed army of
	undead.  He wakes up chained in a dungeon with flowing water.  He pulls
	the chains free of the wall , and wanders through tunnels to make his
	escape, including climbing rocks and going through a waterfall.  At
	last he stops in a cavern to rest.  Another dream of a battlefield,
	his people against Githdani.

250/1	Vardigan manages to get back in the city (after killing two
	shepherds) and checks the corrals.  The animals are not disturbed.
	Then he seeks out Kofi.  The others are at the house of the guard
	captain.  Vardigan's possessions are being sought.  A bounty has
	been posted on him.  That night, Vardigan dreams of Falstaff, and the
	nightmare of undead returns.  In it, Vardigan is wielding a black
	scimitar.

251/1	Hiding out.  The palace was attacked, and the attackers stole bodies.
	There are whispers of treachery naming the captain of the guard.  He
	eventually comes to the house, and gives Vardigan information about
	moving around the palace secretly.  Someone named Nakour is looking for
	Vardigan.

252/1	Vardigan and Erak arrange to meet Nakour, but they are discovered by
	the Sultan's guards and are chased through the city.  They escape with
	the help of the Quatu.  Vardigan is brought to a grotto outside the
	city, where the Quatu are massed.

	That night, Nadi and Mala are brought by Nakoour, and the Wisdom of the
	Desert comes as well.  This blade in Vardigan's dreams is real, and
	it should be in the city somewhere.  It was made by Arioch, and used
	by an ancient king of the Qassari to slay the tribes.  The tribes
	believe Vardigan's coming has been foretold and they are ready to
	exact their revenge.

	Nadi doesn't want to be involved in all this, but Vardigan points out
	he has little choice.

253/1	They are visited by a white man with blond hair.  His name is Simon
	Lefevre, and he is a Frankish mercenary, a Sun Warrior.  He will be
	participating in the impending attack.  Vardigan can get them into
	the city.  That night he leads an expedition to confirm the path.

254/1	There is a terrible battle, culminating in the fall of the city to the
	Quatu.  The Sultan is overthrown and his court is slain.

	In the aftermath, Vardigan meets with the Wisdom of the Desert and
	confers with Falstaff, who confirms the presence of the blade.  It
	is guarded by a trap, a goblin, and a demon of fear.

255/1	The rest of the city falls under the control of the Quatu.  There is
	a great deal of looting.  Eventually, Erak and Vardigan return to the
	city to find the Quatu leader.  They will be aided in their search for
	the blade by someone named Rashid.  They also meet Kofi.  Vardigan
	says that refugees ought to be allowed to leave the city unmolested.

256/1	The search for the blade, culminating in a great battle with its
	guardian in which Erak and Vardigan are almost killed.  Erak is
	maimed.  Vardigan has visions of a terrible court of an undead lord,
	where Mordanith and Morphus are also present.

260/1	Erak will live, but he will be crippled.

264/1	Mala has been fending off guards.

265/1	A great deal of activity beings, to celebrate the final victory and
	the return of the shiek.  The sheik gives Vardigan an obsidian
	medallion with a ruby tower.  They give him the title 'Tower of Blood'

266/1	A Dissenta Captain pays a visit, and tries to kill Storm.

274/1	Quatu tribesmen report seeing Morphus and Mordanith.  Erak gives
	Vardigan a holy symbol of Nahakar, a bronze circle and spear.

280/1	Simon Lefevre has been suffering from a fever.  He has expressed
	interest in travelling with Vardigan when he leaves.  Erak will
	stay behind.

313/1	After rest and preparation, the party takes leave.

315/1	The party is chased from an oasis by a giant snake.  They see signs
	of activity at the ancient citadel.

320/1	The party reaches the place where Vardigan killed the Red Sash
	Assassin.

321/1	Encounter a wyvern on return to the citadel of the Gatekeepers.

322/1	Vardigan commisions a shield from the Gatekeepers, and undertakes
	teaching Mala to fight.  Over the next thirty days, there will be a
	great deal of exploring of the tunnels and caverns near the Citadel,
	but this turns up nothing of significance.

357/1	A party of Dorian wizards calls at the citadel.  Vardigan disguises
	himself, but the leader, a Master Alterationist named Etarran, sees
	through the disguise.  He refers to the blade as a forging of
	darkness, and gives some advice on its care and use, and gives Vardigan
	a letter to introduce himself in Mardin and a gift in the form of a
	scroll.

	The wizards and the party remain for some time.  Over the course of
	this period the party encounters Bel again and learns something about
	dealing with the mountains from a geomancer.  There is a conclave of
	geomancers and a great magical battle.  Vardigan's shield is finished.

052/2	Mala faces the fact Vardigan will never be beholden to her.

069/2	Nadi comes with news of Qasiradam.  It's fallen into factional anarchy.
	The Dorian Alterationists are there, and Mordanith and Morphus have
	passeed through as well.  They have established something resembling
	peace in the region.

089/2	The citadel is visited by Keverian, the Lord of Light, who seems to
	be on the way to godhood.

100/2	The party departs from the citadel, and encounters a pyromancer who
	gives news of grave tidings in Mardin.  Jherek Firelord is on the
	march.

101/2	The party encounters a figure that rather resembles a desert walker.
	It warns of a great evil having been unleashed.  The supposition is
	that this is the demon from Qasiradam, released with the finding of
	the blade.

103/2	The party encounters the body inhabited by the demon, now dead.  A
	pack of wolves led by the demon attacks.  There is a great battle,
	great enough for Simon Lefevre to be moved to invoke Heimdall.  Mala
	is wounded, and eventually dies.

104/2	The party is forced back to the citadel.  They return with the aid of
	a geomancer they encounter at a henge they bypassed before.  Over the
	next ten days, the geomancers will seek out and do battle with the
	demon.  They are unable to kill it, but they can weaken it greatly.
	They provide Vardigan with magical items to aid in doing final battle
	with it.

114/2	Vardigan sets off to hunt the demon.

116/2	In the course of hunting the demon, Vardigan has more terrible dreams,
	battles with Dissenta, and talks with Falstaff.  He encounters a woman
	named Talla, an archer all in white hunting scnow creatures.

117/2	Vardigan does battle with the demon, and is nearly killed.

119/2	Talla and Simon come and help Vardigan, and bring him back to the
	citadel.  He'll be some time recovering.  Seven seperate attempts to
	steal Vardigan's scimitar will be made.

158/2	News of the world beyond reaches the citadel.  Mardin is half
	conquered and Jherek Firelord has acquired a new source of power,
	though Falstaff and the other Sun Lords seem to have stopped the
	advance.

	This news is brought by an illusionist named Oman.  He also
	indicates that artifcats have begin appearing:

	The Divining Blade		By a feudal baroness
	Heimdall's Shield		By the lord paladin
	The Defender			By a feudal lord
	The Eye of Arcan		By a grey elf in the north
	The Blade of Fire		By Nahakar
	The Cup Of The Elven King	By The King of the Lizard Men

	And the dead stir.

167/2	Vardigan's 19th birthday.

174/2

	The gods are warring.  Nahakar, Keverian, and Kay are involved,
	but the outcome is unknown.


175/2	The party departs the citadel once more.  In the next ten days,
	they cross a huge ice bridge and see the place where Mordanith and
	Morphus did their summoning.

185/2	The party reaches the lowlands.  The weather seems to have been
	corrupted.

187/2	The party meets a caravan of Hetasians bound for the Qeroshae,
	thinking it is paradise.

191/2	The party comes upon a change in the landscape, a huge plateau.
	They are apprehended by a cowled figure in red who tells them they
	are trespassing on Thunder Plateau.  He is an Evoker called Eraphani
	Estavar, and wears a silver and ruby ring.

192/2	The sunrise has a strange aura again.

195/2	Encounter a Dorian prince, attended by a paladin of Arioch.  The party
	gives tehm news of Qasiradam.

196/2	After a mana storm, the party sets out for Mardin.

198/2	The party encounters a hermit, and sees a caravan in the distance.

199/2	The party reaches the Temple of Hercules, to a joyful reunion with the
	priest and his attending dryads.

203/2	After weathering another mana storm, the party reaches Mardin.

204/2	The party does battle with 2 Red Sash Assassins, 2 city guards, and a
	mob.  Vardigan meets with Falstaff and tells him of his errand to the
	Alterationists.  They strike the bargain for magical tutelage for
	Vardigan's people.  More Red Sash Assassins are grist for Vardigan's
	mill, and eventually this teaches them he's a target they can't take.

205/2	The party sets out for the Frankish lands, Simon's home.

208/2	The party does battle with and slays three green-robed wizards.

210/2	As the land becomes more barren, the party passes a large gray tower.

212/2	The part encounters a broken-down wagon, which turns out to be yet
	yet another Dissenta trap.

217/2	The party encounters its first Frankish merchants.

218/2	The party reaches a walled town, the extermity of Frankish settlement.
	They spend the night in a barn, and meet a girl named Mala.

221/2	The party reaches an inn of sorts after a day in the rain.  A courier,
	a woman who looks like an elf (but isn't) enters.  While she and Simon
	get drunk, she gives news of coming across the badlands, where there
	has been a slave rebellion.  A man in his 40s arrives.  He is a herald
	for one of the Wizard-King's generals.

222/2	The party, the elf-woman, and the herald all leave together.  They
	reach a fortress.  Simon makes love with the courier.

223/2	The storm finally breaks.

224/2	The party departs for Simon's homeland.

227/2	The party reaches a castle held by Simon's relatives.  The heir to the
	places is there, drunk, whining over a woman.  Vardigan makes himself
	comfortable and fends off the serving girls.

228/2	Vardigan is brought to the Scriptorum at the Temple of Heimdall by a
	priest, a cousin of Simon's.  There, the blade is identified as having
	four aspects:

		A Body Guardian
		A Mind Guardian
		An Expression Of Will
		An Expression Of the Will of Arioch.

	Vardigan is granted a gift -- he may once call on Athena to aid his
	speech.

229/2	Vardigan meets the lord of the castle.  Simon's cousin Belvedere
	brings word of family trouble.  Another Baron has levelled a
	challenge.

230/2	Simon and Vardigan challenge this other lord and his champion.

231/2	Rodriguez, the other baron's champion, is taken prisoner.  Simon
	says he will stay and see things straightened out.

232/2	Vardigan sets out alone, leaving the Lefevre lands.

233/2	Vardigan meets a merchant, and exchanges news.

234/2	Vardigan changes some money at a town and presses on across the
	Frankish countryside.  He camps by a river, that appears to be
	haunted by memories of some ancient battle.

235/2	Vardigan reaches the road that leads to the capital.  He comes upon
	a priestess of Heimdall with a disabled oxcart, but she takes umbrage
	at his approach.  She is being victimized by a vampire -- her late
	husband.  Vardigan spirits her to safety in a temple.

236/2	Vardigan and the Saren named Agatha reach a town, and Vardigan is
	brought to see the Baron, who calls him a Prince.  He gives Vardigan a
	letter granting passage through the Frankish lands.

237/2	Vardigan is questioned by some knights bearing a lion-and-spear banner,
	but the letter satisfies them.  Vardigan passes a castle and reaches
	a town.

238/2	Vardigan enters a forest, where the locals are having trouble with
	werewolves.

239/2	Vardigan reaches a huge traffic jam outside the Frankish capital,
	where he encounters a Frankish Countess, Anastasia.  She is off to her
	aunt's estate, and he goes with her.  There is an attack by Dissenta,
	which Vardigan dispatches.

240/2	Vardigan keeps company with the Countess and her relations.  That
	night he goes to the Countess's bed.

241/2	Falstaff finally brings them to the head of the line of people waiting
	to see the king.   Vardigan is invited to a feast.  The Countess's
	cousin has an assignation with some sort of sorceror.  The Countess
	has come to see the king regarding her own lands.  Much discussion
	of varied topics.

244/2	The Countess has an argument with her uncle the Baron.

245/2	The Countess obtains the writs she wants from the king.  She and
	Vardigan encounter a death knight, but there is no violence.

246/2	Vardigan and the Countess sneak off -- there's reason to believe
	she's being watched and might be interfered with.

249/2	Vardigan gets the feeling the demon is near.

255/2	Some knights attempt to stop the Countess returning home.  The demon
	destroys a ghoul that's been pursuing.


256/2	They close on Anastasia's lands.  They meet her Master Huntsman, and
	eventually reach the 4-story stone manor house.  Everyone is surprised
	to see her.

	A messenger has news.  The Fairfields, Anastasia's western neighbors,
	were burned out a while ago.  No luck finding the culprits.  Some of
	them escaped.  This messenger comes from one Marchand.  It is decided
	Vardigan will go to see them with Edward, Anastasia's right-hand man.

	Vardigan has more bad dreams.

258/2	Marchand holds a keep, and he's training troops for something.
	Vardigan impresses the assembly with his own combat prowess.  A
	servant girl named Cheryse comes to talk to him about goings on there.
	She's afraid of her lord, and spends the night (chastely) with
	Vardigan.

259/2	Vardigan is invited to stay, but he decides to move on.  An oddly
	dressed priest bursts in, uninvited but unimpeded.  There are rumors
	of trouble with their overlord, a Duke.  The church turns out to be
	equally strange.  Vardigan encounters a half-Daushauan captain of
	mercenaries whose men are being employed to collect taxes.  Things stay
	peaceful.

260/2	The mercenaries ride off in the direction of the Duke's holding.

261/2	A new visitor is at the manor.  Antoine, some sort of long-haired
	sorceror, warning of gathering dark magic.  He is dispatched with a
	brief message to the capital.
	
	Others will be taking longer reports.  Vardigan has an argument with
	Anastasia's steward.
	
	Something definitely seems to be brewing and it would be bad if
	she were caught in a siege, but she is determined to stay.

266/2	Somewhere along the way, Vardigan has figured out he can command the
	demon that follows the blade.  He dispatches it to watch the Hetasian
	border.

269/2	An attempt is made on Anastasia's life, thwarted by Vardigan.  Oscar,
	her military chief, is not pleased by this penetration of the defenses.

270/2	Antoine returns.  He was successful.

274/2	Falstaff pays a visit, apparently just to see what's up.

276/2	Simon Lefevre arrives, in the company of 30 knights.  Of course, if
	Marchand means trouble, he has 2000 troops nearby.
