H43743
s 00071/00000/00000
d D 1.1 02/01/14 20:41:20 jmochel 2 1
cC
cF1
cK16048
cO-rw-rw-rw-
e
s 00000/00000/00000
d D 1.0 02/01/14 20:41:20 jmochel 1 0
c BitKeeper file g:/workspace/BardicTales/Cultures/Edit3.txt
cBjmochel@devilmountain|ChangeSet|20001208143925|39592|56cfc6eb
cHdevilmountain
cK06990
cPCultures/Edit3.txt
cR151efefb
cV4
cX0x1b1
cZ-05:00
e
u
U
f e 0
f x 0x1b1
t
T
I 2

Shinto (literally, the way of the gods) is the native Japanese religion. It 
originated in prehistoric times and has long played an important role in 
Japanese society. The major shrines around the country have often been power 
bases, closely tied with Imperial and shogunal powers. Unlike the world's major 
religions, Shinto has no fixed dogma, moral precepts, or sacred scriptures. 
Followers worship a huge array of kami (gods or spirits) which personify all 
aspects of nature, such as the sky, the earth, heavenly bodies, and natural 
phenomena. A common example is Jizo (right), the guardian of children, whose 
statues can be seen at shrines all over the country. The statues, usually small 
and made of stone, are often wrapped in children's clothes and covered in 
offerings of food. Many of the matsuri (festivals) held all over Japan 
originated from Shinto rites, including prayers of thanksgiving, offerings of 
food and valuables, and purification rituals.

Shinto only received an actual name in the late 6th century AD, in order to 
distinguish it from Buddhism and Confucianism, newly introduced from China. The 
Imperial court adopted Buddhism and many other aspects of Chinese culture and 
innovation. The emperors also became Buddhist, though Shinto continued to be 
practiced at court and at a few of the major shrines. The foreign and native 
religions continued to assimilate for over a thousand years. In the late 8th 
century, under the great teacher Kukai, Shinto and Buddhism were united as a new 
doctrine called Ryobu Shinto (the Shinto of two kinds). Later, the kami came to 
be considered as incarnations of Bodhisattvas (compassionate beings on the verge 
of Buddhahood but who have vowed to help others achieve this state first). The 
most popular Bodhisattvas whose statues can be commonly seen today are Kannon, a 
goddess of compassion and Jizo, a protector of children.

	
During the Edo Period (1600~1868) there was a revival of nationalistic 
sentiments. One result was a resurgent interest in the ancient Shinto beliefs, 
and the discarding of foreign influences. During the Meiji Restoration of 1868, 
the emperor was restored to the head of the government and Shinto was 
established as the state religion. The emperor was considered the divine 
descendant of the sun goddess. This direct lineage from the gods was reflected 
in a feeling of Japanese superiority, which in turn fed the miltary expansion of 
the Japanese Empire. State Shinto was considered the official belief of the 
entire Japanese race and was embodied in the huge number of shrines, large and 
small, throughout the country. The great shrines are Meiji Jingu and Yasukuni 
Jinja in Tokyo, Ise Jingu in Ise and Izumo Taisha in Matsue. Sectarian Shinto 
was divided up into many sects, which can be grouped into five main categories, 
based on: traditional Shinto, Confucianism, faith healing, mountain worship, and 
purification rites.
		
	
The sanshu no jingi, or Imperial Regalia (right) are holy relics which appear in 
Japan's ancient myths. They are the symbols of the legitimacy and authority of 
the emperor.
	
In order of importance, they consist of the sacred mirror (yata no kagami, 
stored at Ise Shrine), the sacred sword (kusanagi no tsurugi, stored at Atsuta 
Jingu shrine in Nagoya) and the curved jewels (yasakani no magatama, kept at the 
Imperial Palace in Tokyo). The original sacred sword was lost at the famous 
Battle of Dannoura in 1185.
		
According to the myth, the sun goddess Amaterasu Omikami was driven to hide 
herself in a cave by the boisterous behaviour of her younger brother, Susanoo no 
Mikoto, god of the oceans. The sacred mirror was used to lure her from her 
hiding place. When she emerged, the deities of heaven presented her with the 
sacred jewels. The sword was removed from the tail of a serpent by Susanoo and 
presented to his sister as a sign of his submission.
	
In addition to the hundreds of festivals, many Shinto ceremonies play an 
important part in modern daily life. Many marriages are carried out in shrines, 
building plots are purified and sometimes even new cars are blessed for safety. 
In a rite called oharai, the white-clad priest waves a stick with white strips 
of paper attached to carry out the blessing. Most family homes have a kamidana 
(god shelf) as well as a Buddist butsudan (Buddha altar). The main teaching 
centers for Shinto priests are Kokugakuin University in Tokyo and Kogakukan 
University in Ise.

E 2
I 1
E 1
