Designation of Poisons
I. Name-Path-Type-Onset-Duration-Potency Loss-Damage-Description-Comment

A. Path
i. lnsinuative(lN) -
a. lnsinuative poisons are those that require a break in the skin in
order to enter the blood streal and take action.
2. Contact(BD) '
a. Contact poisons are those that can be absorbed through the skin.
Typically these poisons take longer to enter the system and take
effect.
3. lngestive(IE) ’
a. lngested poisons are those that are taken into the body by food
or drink. These are the most common and generally the most effective
effective of all poisons.
4. Airborne(AP)
a. Airborne Powder poisons are those rare toxins that are taken into
the body by being inhaled. There are only a few of these in
existence. A


a. Gas poisons are taken into the body by being inhaled. There are
only a few of these in existence. Rarely are they carried in
their natural state. Usually the materials needed to create then
are carried and combined at the site of deployoent.

B. Special(SPC)
a. Any of a variety of other paths that are truly out of the
ordinary.


B. Type .
1. Death Dealing(DD)
a. Death Dealing poison require the victil to roll a saving throw.
lf that saving throw is failed then the user will die at the end
Y of he duration of the poison's effect.
2. Paralytic(P)
a. Paralytic poisons require a saving throw versus paralysation. lf
failed the character will be limited in action until the end of
the poison's duration
3. Danage(Dl
a. Danage doing poisons are the most common. They require a saving
throw against poison. If the save is failed the character will
take damage as detailed by the fifth element in the poison
designation. The damage will be taken once per each basic time element. As an example, if a poison has a duration of 10 rounds
and a daoage of ld6 then the character takes ld6 of damage per 1 round.


Hallucinogenic(H)

Hallucination poisons are uncoeeon but often effective. If a save
is made then the character is able to ignore the shades his lade
is throwing up on all sides of hie. lf he fails then his actions
are slowed to half speed and he gets a minus in coebat equal to
i/2 the amount he pissed the ST by.

Sleeping (SL)
Sleep poisons are fairly straight forward. A ST is eade at the
onset of the poison. If failed the character falls asleep. The
character is entitled to another ST at halfway through the
duration.

Special ial(SPCl '
These are special effect poisons that have non-standard effects


Onset time 
escribed in the Haterials Designation

duration
escribed in the Haterials Designation

Potency loss
escribed in the Haterials Designation

Damage 
first character is the number of diet damage, the second character is the size of the die, and then a modifier
2d6+2

ll. Insinuative Poisons Coats Per Dose

Dart         8             
Arrow        4             
Dagger       2
Hand Axe     2
Scinitar     1
Spear        1
Pole Are     1 Edge        
Short Sw     l Edge
Broadswo     half of an inch
Bastard 			one half of an edge
Longsuor     one half of an edge 
T-sword      one third of an edge 
             rd    
                     
III. Typically raw plant poisons are less effective and eore subject to potency
loss than poisons prepared fro: the plant.
