Astronomers report unprecedented double helix near center of Milky Way

nr_6903aAstronomers report an unprecedented elongated double helix nebula near 
the center of our Milky Way galaxy, using observations from NASA's Spitzer Space 
Telescope. The part of the nebula the astronomers observed stretches 80 light 
years in length. The research is published March 16 in the journal Nature.

"We see two intertwining strands wrapped around each other as in a DNA 
molecule," said Mark Morris, a UCLA professor of physics and astronomy, and lead 
author. "Nobody has ever seen anything like that before in the cosmic realm. 
Most nebulae are either spiral galaxies full of stars or formless amorphous 
conglomerations of dust and gas -- space weather. What we see indicates a high 
degree of order."

The double helix nebula is approximately 300 light years from the enormous black 
hole at the center of the Milky Way. (The Earth is more than 25,000 light years 
from the black hole at the galactic center.)

The Spitzer Space Telescope, an infrared telescope, is imaging the sky at 
unprecedented sensitivity and resolution; Spitzer's sensitivity and spatial 
resolution were required to see the double helix nebula clearly.

"We know the galactic center has a strong magnetic field that is highly ordered 
and that the magnetic field lines are oriented perpendicular to the plane of the 
galaxy," Morris said. "If you take these magnetic field lines and twist them at 
their base, that sends what is called a torsional wave up the magnetic field 
lines.

"You can regard these magnetic field lines as akin to a taut rubber band," 
Morris added. "If you twist one end, the twist will travel up the rubber band."

Offering another analogy, he said the wave is like what you see if you take a 
long loose rope attached at its far end, throw a loop, and watch the loop travel 
down the rope.

"That's what is being sent down the magnetic field lines of our galaxy," Morris 
said. "We see this twisting torsional wave propagating out. We don't see it move 
because it takes 100,000 years to move from where we think it was launched to 
where we now see it, but it's moving fast -- about 1,000 kilometers per second -
- because the magnetic field is so strong at the galactic center -- about 1,000 
times stronger than where we are in the galaxy's suburbs."

A strong, large-scale magnetic field can affect the galactic orbits of molecular 
clouds by exerting a drag on them. It can inhibit star formation, and can guide 
a wind of cosmic rays away from the central region; understanding this strong 
magnetic field is important for understanding quasars and violent phenomena in a 
galactic nucleus. Morris will continue to probe the magnetic field at the 
galactic center in future research.

This magnetic field is strong enough to cause activity that does not occur 
elsewhere in the galaxy; the magnetic energy near the galactic center is capable 
of altering the activity of our galactic nucleus and by analogy the nuclei of 
many galaxies, including quasars, which are among the most luminous objects in 
the universe. All galaxies that have a well-concentrated galactic center may 
also have a strong magnetic field at their center, Morris said, but so far, ours 
is the only galaxy where the view is good enough to study it.

Morris has argued for many years that the magnetic field at the galactic center 
is extremely strong; the research published in Nature strongly supports that 
view.

The magnetic field at the galactic center, though 1,000 times weaker than the 
magnetic field on the sun, occupies such a large volume that it has vastly more 
energy than the magnetic field on the sun. It has the energy equivalent of 1,000 
supernovae.

What launches the wave, twisting the magnetic field lines near the center of the 
Milky Way? Morris thinks the answer is not the monstrous black hole at the 
galactic center, at least not directly.

Orbiting the black hole like the rings of Saturn, several light years away, is a 
massive disk of gas called the circumnuclear disk; Morris hypothesizes that the 
magnetic field lines are anchored in this disk. The disk orbits the black hole 
approximately once every 10,000 years.

"Once every 10,000 years is exactly what we need to explain the twisting of the 
magnetic field lines that we see in the double helix nebula," Morris said.

Co-authors on the Nature paper are Keven Uchida, a former UCLA graduate student 
and former member of Cornell University's Center for Radiophysics and Space 
Research; and Tuan Do, a UCLA astronomy graduate student. Morris and his UCLA 
colleagues study the galactic center at all wavelengths