PNNL NEWSROOM www.pnl.gov/news Pacific Northwest National Laboratory NEWSROOM 
Skip Navigation

    * News and Media o NEWSROOM o News Releases + Archives o About PNNL o Photo 
    Library o Expert Resources o PNNL In the News + Archives o Subscribe o 
    Contact Us o PNNL in the Community o Other Links o XML RSS Feed * Magazines 
    and Newsletters o Magazine: Breakthroughs o Newsletter: Sharing the 
    Excitement of Science o DOE Pulse o DOE Research News (EuekAlert) * 
    Scientific Publications o Publications List

N A V I G A T I O N

Release date: July 10, 2006 Contact: Bill Cannon, (509) 375-3732 Live Wires

A microbiologist discovers our planet is hard-wired with electricity-producing 
bacteria

REACHING OUT--Scanning electron microscopic images (left column) of how 
different bacteria can be made to sprout nanowires to pass electrons. The 
scanning tunneling microscopic images at right of individual nanowires confirm 
that they are conducting electricity. (A, B: a strain of the photosynthetic 
Synechocystis; and C, D: a fermenting strain, Pelotomaculum thermopropionicum). 
(Original high-resolution image.)

RICHLAND, Wash. – When Yuri Gorby discovered that a microbe which transforms 
toxic metals can sprout tiny electrically conductive wires from its cell 
membrane, he reasoned this anatomical oddity and its metal-changing physiology 
must be related.

A colleague who had heard Gorby’s presentation at a scientific meeting later 
reported that he, too, was able to coax nanowires from another so-called metal-
reducing bacteria species and further suggested the wires, called pili, could be 
used to bioengineer electrical devices.

It now turns out that not only are the wires and their ability to alter metal 
connected—but that many other bacteria, including species involved in 
fermentation and photosynthesis, can also form wires under a variety of 
environmental conditions.

“Earth appears to be hard-wired,” said Gorby, staff scientist at the Department 
of Energy’s Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, who documents the seeming 
ubiquity of electrically conductive microbial life in the July 10 advance online 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

In a series of experiments, Gorby and colleagues induced nanowires in a variety 
of bacteria and demonstrated that they were electrically conductive. The 
bacterial nanowires were as small as 10 nanometers in diameter and formed 
bundles as wide as 150 nanometers. They grew to be tens of microns to hundreds 
of microns long.

The common thread involved depriving a microbe of something it needed to shed 
excess energy in the form of electrons. For example, Shewanella, of interest in 
environmental cleanup for its ability to hasten the weathering of toxic metals 
into benign ones, requires oxygen or other electron acceptors for respiration, 
whereas Synechocystis, a cyanobacterium, combines electrons with carbon dioxide 
during photosynthesis.

Bereft of these “electron acceptors,” bacterial nanowires “will literally reach 
out and connect cells from one to another to form an electrically integrated 
community,” Gorby said.

“The physiological and ecological implications for these interactions are not 
currently known,” he said, “but the effect is suggestive of a highly organized 
form of energy distribution among members of the oldest and most sustainable 
life forms on the planet.”

In one clever twist, Gorby grew pili from mutant strains developed by 
collaborators that were unable to produce select electron transport components 
called cytochromes. Sure enough, the nanowires of the mutants were poor 
conductors.

“These implicate cytochromes as the electrically conductive components of 
nanowires, although this has yet to be conclusively demonstrated,” Gorby said.

To measure currents as precisely as possible, Gorby and colleagues from the 
University of Southern California have built a microbial fuel cell laboratory at 
PNNL. The small bacteria-powered batteries, cultured under electron-acceptor 
limitations and fueled by lactate or light, produce very little power, as 
measured by a voltmeter hooked to a laptop computer.

But co-author and PNNL scientist Jeff Mclean, who manages the microbial fuel 
cell laboratory, said that small changes in fuel cell design and culture 
conditions have already shown large improvements in the efficiency of the fuel 
cells. For example, so-called biofilms—a highly interconnected bacterial 
community—put out much more energy than other configurations. The research was 
funded by the DOE Office of Science programs Genomics: Genomes to Life and 
Natural and Accelerated Bioremediation Research in the Office of Biological and 
Environmental Research.

PNNL is a DOE Office of Science laboratory that solves complex problems in 
energy, national security, the environment and life sciences by advancing the 
understanding of physics, chemistry, biology and computation. PNNL employs 4,200 
staff, has an annual budget of more than $725 million, and has been managed by 
Ohio-based Battelle since the lab's inception in 1965. Pacific Northwest 
National Laboratory Department of Energy Office of Science

Security & Privacy Contact: Webmaster Last Updated: July 2006
