 Reuters

 Print this article 	Close This Window Genetic barcodes will identify world's 
 species Wed Feb 9, 2005 07:08 PM ET

By Patricia Reaney

LONDON (Reuters) - A team of international scientists launched an ambitious 
project on Thursday to genetically identify, or provide a barcode for, every 
plant and animal species on the planet.

By taking a snippet of DNA from all the known species on Earth and linking them 
to photographs, descriptions and scientific information, the researchers plan to 
build the largest database of its kind.

"We have discovered that it is quite possible to have a short DNA sequence that 
can characterise just about every form of life on the planet," Dr Richard Lane, 
director of science at the Natural History Museum in London, told a news 
conference.

Less than a fifth of the Earth's estimated 10 million species of plants and 
animals have been named. Researchers working on the Barcode of Life Initiative 
hope that genetically identifying all of them in a standardised way on a global 
scale will speed up the discovery of new ones.

Current techniques used to identify minute differences between species are 
complicated, time consuming and require specialist knowledge.

"What we are looking at is a new method which will allow just about anyone, in 
any part of the world, to recognise organisms without recourse to a particular 
specialist," said Lane.

SCIENTIFIC TOOL

The initiative was launched at the International Conference for the Barcoding of 
Life in London by a consortium of museums, zoos, government agencies and 
organisations around the globe that study biodiversity.

"Our mission is to develop DNA barcoding as a scientific tool for rapid 
identification of species and to put that tool to work for both science and 
society," said Dr Scott Miller of the Smithsonian Institution in the United 
States and chair of the consortium.

It already has about 50 members in 25 countries on six continents and the 
numbers are growing, according to Miller.

The information it collects can be used to identify pathogens, carriers of 
disease, pests and to monitor endangered species.

The initiative will begin with three projects. One will provide barcodes for the 
10,000 known species of birds by 2010, another will tackle the 23,000 types of 
marine and fresh water fish and a third will genetically label the 8,000 kinds 
of plants in Costa Rica, Central America.

All rights reserved. Users may download and print extracts of content from this 
website for their own personal and non-commercial use only. Republication or 
redistribution of Reuters content, including by framing or similar means, is 
expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and 
the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of the Reuters 
group of companies around the world.

© Reuters 2005 Close This Window
