California-backs-$3bn-stem-cell-fund
17:39 03 November 2004 
NewScientist.com news service 
Shaoni Bhattacharya 
Related Articles
US stem cells tainted by mouse material
01 November 2004
The US battle over stem cells
06 October 2004
America: Closed for new scientific business?
06 October 2004
Search New Scientist
Contact us
Web Links
Yes on 71
No on 71
Evan Snyder, Burnham Institute
International Society for Stem Cell Research
 

Voters in California have approved a plan to provide $3 billion of state funding for stem cell research, according to returns from US ballot boxes.

Proposition 71 authorises the sale of tax-free bonds by the state government in order to release $295 million of research money each year for 10 years. It was backed by 59% of voters.

The massive cash injection will be used to create a new research network called the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine. California is the first US state to provide funding for stem cell research. Federal funding for such research is severely restricted by measures introduced by President George W Bush.

“I think this is going to launch amazing things,” says Evan Snyder, director of the stem cell and regeneration programme at the Burnham Institute in La Jolla, California, who helped craft the initiative. “It’s a landmark decision – for the very first time a state has taken control of its own healthcare needs and has insulated itself from whatever is going on in Washington DC.”
Nobel laureates

Proposition 71 was highly controversial and prompted heavy campaigning by Nobel 
laureates, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, Hollywood stars and the wealthy parents 
of sick children.

Arnold Schwarzenegger, the governor of California, went against his Republican 
colleagues in endorsing the plan. “California has always been a pioneer,” he 
said on 18 October. “We daringly led the way for the high-tech industry and now 
voters can help ensure we lead the way for the bio-tech industry.”

The late Christopher Reeve also backed the proposition, but many opposed it on 
religious or moral objections. And some say that payments on the bonds will be 
too expensive for the state, costing it $6 billion overall. However, repayments 
and interest on the bonds, a type of loan, will be deferred for five years.

Under the Bush administration, just $25 million of annual federal funding has 
been given stem cell research in the whole of the US. Democrat candidate John 
Kerry pledged to increase this to $100 million. 

Embryonic stem cells are primitive unspecialised cells that can differentiate 
into any type of cell in the body. It is believed they could replenish or 
replace diseased or damaged tissues, leading to potential cures for conditions 
such as diabetes, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.

Proposition 71 supports research into adult, embryonic and cord blood stem cells. It does not endorse human reproductive cloning, which is illegal under the state's law.

President Bush limited federally funded research on human ESCs to just 22 stem cell lines created before August 2001, However, recent research suggests these may be of little therapeutic value because they were tainted with sugars from mice.

Snyder says the new state initiative means that California will no longer be limited to using these lines. The proposition “will allow scientists to be scientists” he told New Scientist. “From now on data and not politics will dictate the experiments that we do.”

He adds that California may have set a precedent which other states such as Massachusetts or New York might follow. But he says proposition 71 may lead to California becoming the premier place for stem cell research in the world.
 