SMART-1 settles into lunar orbit
11:49 16 November 2004 
NewScientist.com news service 
Hazel Muir 
Related Articles
European spacecraft prepares to orbit Moon
11 November 2004
Stalling Moon probe to get new software
29 January 2004
Radar data evaporate Moon's ice sheets
12 November 2003
Search New Scientist
Contact us
Web Links
European Space Agency, SMART-1
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
Ion drive versus chemical rocket
NASA: the Moon
 

Europe’s first lunar spacecraft, SMART-1, has successfully cruised into orbit around the Moon. It entered orbit late on Monday, while making its closest approach so far - passing about 5000 kilometres above the lunar surface. 

SMART-1’s engine will run almost continuously for the next four days, before preparing to spiral the spacecraft into its final orbit with a series of shorter burns. Scientific observations will begin when this orbit is achieved, in mid-January 2005.

One goal is to survey the Peak of Eternal Light, a mountaintop at the lunar south pole that is permanently bathed in sunlight. This keeps the temperature stable at a tolerable -20ºC, making it a favoured site for a manned lunar base. The bright sunshine could also provide astronauts with solar power, and there may even be plenty of useful water ice in craters nearby.

SMART-1 was launched in September 2003 and is the first of a series of low-budget European Space Agency projects - called Small Missions for Advanced Research in Technology - which will test new technologies for bigger projects.
Awesome efficiency

The spacecraft has a new kind of propulsion system: a highly efficient ion drive. Solar panels generate electricity, which heats and ionises xenon fuel. The ions are then ejected, propelling the craft in the opposite direction. The drive is 10 times more efficient than a traditional rocket, and has so far passed its tests with flying colours.

The excellent efficiency of the engine has allowed the spacecraft to reach the Moon two months earlier than expected. And leftover fuel will allow mission controllers to take the spacecraft into a closer orbit of the Moon than they originally planned, giving the instruments a better view of the lunar surface when scientific observations commence.

SMART-1 will sweep round the lunar poles, coming as close as 300 kilometres over the south pole. It will study the Moon’s surface contours, map the distribution of different minerals, and hopefully provide new clues to how the lunar surface evolved.

A key region targeted by the probe is the South Pole-Aitken basin. Roughly 2500 kilometres wide and 13 km deep, it is the largest known impact crater in the solar system. “It’s deep enough to punch through the lower crust down into the Moon’s mantle,” says Manuel Grande, lead scientist for the SMART-1’s X-ray spectrometer. “We’re looking into the Moon’s interior and into its past.”

The data gathered could help shed light on the Moon’s origins. Scientists believe the Moon probably formed when a Mars-sized body smashed into the Earth during the birth of the solar system 4.5 billion years ago.