Researchers Build Sharpest Tip

Forget the phrase, "sharp as a tack." Now, thanks to new University of Alberta 
research the popular expression might become, "sharp as a single atom tip formed 
by chemically assisted spatially controlled field evaporation." Maybe it doesn't 
roll off the tongue as easily, but considering the researchers have created the 
sharpest object ever made, it would be accurate. Ads by Google Advertise on this 
site Slide Shows for Physics MathType for science and math presentations - free 
download! www.dessci.com Nanoscale Science (VJ) Read abstracts of current 
articles from AIP & APS journals. http://www.vjnano.org Bio AFM Atomic Force 
Microscopes (AFM) for Soft Matter and Life Science www.jpk.com Nanoparticle 
White Papers Commercial quantum dots & application White Papers available 
www.evidenttech.com Nanotechnology Investment New nanotechnology that may 
reverse aging and treat disease www.504bank.com/telodpo.asp

The scientists, working out of the National Institute of Nanotechnology at the U 
of A, used a unique process to make the sharpest tip ever known and opened the 
door to a range of possibilities. Technically speaking, they were able to coat 
peripheral atoms near the peak with nitrogen, making it a one atom-thick, tough 
protective paint job. "That coating has the effect of binding the little pyramid 
of metal atoms or Tungsten, in place," said Dr. Robert Wolkow, a physics 
professor at the U of A and co-author on the research paper published in the 
Journal of Chemical Physics. "Such a pointy pyramid of metal atoms would 
normally just smudge away spontaneously. It's like a sand pile--you know you 
can't make it arbitrarily pointy. If you try to pile on more sand, it flows down 
and makes a more blunt pile. Metal atoms will do the same thing."

These sharp tips are needed for making contact with metals or semiconductors as 
well as for the manipulation and examination of atoms, molecules and small 
particles. Ultrafine tips are demanded for future experiments where the results 
are directly dependent on shape of the tip.

The tips made by Wolkow and the research team--made up of Moh'd Rezeq and Jason 
Pitters from NINT--are so stable they withstand about 900 degrees Celsius. They 
are so sharp they appear so far to serve as excellent emitters of electron 
beams. "The lenses in an electron microscope work more perfectly if the electron 
beam comes from a really small point," said Wolkow. "Since we have the smallest 
point source of electrons, we think we will be able to make the best electron 
microscopes. This is speculation, but based on pretty conventional thinking.

"If this works, and it remains to be proven, it would be like taking a modest 
car and making it go like a race car by just changing its spark plugs. We would 
take a conventional electron microscope, put in one of our tips as the electron 
source and render the microscope instantly improved and capable of finer 
resolution."

Electron microscopes enable advances in diverse areas. Research problems that 
are just out of reach today but that could be made accessible by advances in 
electron microscopy include studies of the little pores that form in our cells 
walls and which are centrally important in the regulation of all life processes 
as well as new nano-structured materials that are ultra-light yet strong, 
allowing reduced energy consumption in vehicles.

Wolkow also expects their sharp tips will allow electrical characterization of 
extremely small objects, in turn allowing new device concepts to be discovered 
and tested.

