Cryptography system goes underground

19 August 2004

A group of scientists in Austria and Germany has installed an optical fibre 
quantum cryptography system under the streets of Vienna and used it to perform 
the first quantum secure bank wire transfer (A Poppe et al. 2004 Optics Express 
12 3865). The quantum cryptography system consisted of a transmitter (Alice) at 
Vienna's City Hall and a receiver (Bob) at the headquarters of an Austrian bank. 
The sites were linked by 1.45 kilometres of single-mode optical fibre.

Andreas Poppe at the University of Vienna and colleagues at ARC Seibersdorf 
Research in Austria and Ludwig-Maximillians University in Germany used an 
entangled-state quantum cryptography system that relies on entangled photon 
pairs. Entangled photons are unpolarized while they travel and only assume a 
polarization state when measured. Because they are entangled, measuring the 
polarization of one photon determines the polarization of the other. 

At Alice, a 405-nm laser diode pumps a nonlinear crystal to produce entangled 
photon pairs with a wavelength of 810 nm using the process of "down-conversion". 
One of the photons is locally analysed in Alice's detection module, while the 
other is sent over the 1.45 kilometre link to the remote site (Bob). It took 
about 30 seconds to transfer the photons need to establish a secure "key" for 
the transaction. 

According to the authors, one advantage of their system is that the key comes 
into existence at both Alice and Bob and does not have to be transferred between 
the two. With the key safely in hand, the team was able to securely wire money 
from the City Hall to the bank. "The exposure of the fibres to realistic 
environmental conditions such as stress and strain during installation, as well 
as temperature changes were important features of this experiment," says Poppe. 
"The successful operation of the system shows that it works in a realistic 
quantum cryptography scenario." 

The Vienna team has also recently demonstrated quantum teleportation over a 
distance of 600 metres along an optical fibre that runs beneath the Danube (R 
Ursin et al. 2004 Nature 430 849). About the author