First private astronaut rockets into space
18:50 21 June 2004 
NewScientist.com news service 
David L Chandler, Mojave 
Enlarge image
Huge cheers greeted Melvill after he crawled out of the rocketplane
Related Articles
Pioneer spirit behind civilian space shot
21 June 2004
Civilian craft ready to make space history
18 June 2004
Private rocket ship sets altitude record
14 May 2004
Search New Scientist
Contact us
Web Links
Scaled Composites
Ansari X-Prize
Mojave airport
 

Test pilot Michael Melvill rocketed into the history books on Monday morning, becoming the first person ever to become an astronaut without the help of any government-funded hardware.

"It was almost a religious experience," Melvill said after stepping out of the sports-car sized craft and into warm embraces from SpaceShipOne designer Burt Rutan and its financial backer, Paul Allen. "You get a helluva view from 62 miles," he said, referring to the altitude that is the official start of space.

Melvill, a 63-year-old test pilot born in South Africa, took the privately-developed three-seater rocket up to its 100 kilometre target in a flight that lasted about 90 minutes in total. Take off from the Mojave Airport in the Californian desert was delayed just 16 minutes past its scheduled time.

Thousands of spectators watched from the airport, joined by millions more on television. Huge cheers accompanied each step of the flight, especially when the returning astronaut first crawled out of the rocketplane.

There were no serious problems during the flight. But Melvill reported one very scary moment, when he heard loud bangs behind him during the 70-second rocket engine burn. An inspection of the craft after landing revealed a crumpled engine fairing. The component had been added at the last minute to reduce aerodynamic drag, and was not essential for safety.

Rutan said that one manoeuvre he was particularly worried about, the innovative "feathering" of the wings for landing, had worked flawlessly. "It turned out to be a non-event," he said. After years of hard work leading up to this moment, Rutan said: "There were several times in mission control when tears came to our eyes."
Hybrid motor

Funded by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, the $20 million record-making spacecraft is a two-part system. The flight began with a conventional runway takeoff, with SpaceShipOne slung underneath a jet-powered airplane called White Knight, which took an hour to carry SpaceShipOne aloft to about 15,250 metres (50,000 feet). 

SpaceShipOne was then released and a few seconds later Melvill ignited its unique hybrid rocket motor, which uses a rubber-based solid fuel and nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, as an oxidiser. This provides the reliability of solid rocket motors, combined with the controllability of liquid motors.

The motor fired for about 70 seconds, propelling the craft straight up, where it continued coasting upward to reach the fringes of space. There, the blackness of space and the curvature of the Earth is visible, and the pilot experienced more than three minutes of weightlessness.

The craft is designed to carry three people, but for this initial flight carried just the pilot. In about two months, it is expected to make the first of two flights within a two-week period to attempt to win the $10 million Ansari X-Prize.
Flights for all

Ecstatic about the flight, X-Prize director Peter Diamandis told New Scientist: "It's about time!" He has been frustrated with the slow pace of government efforts to lower the costs and increase the reliability of space flight, and sees such private ventures as the way to open up space for widespread commercial development.

With the capacity to carry two passengers, SpaceShipOne is "a vehicle that the rest of us can go on," Diamandis said.

And Burt Rutan, designer of SpaceShipOne, said this flight means that "very soon, it'll be affordable for you to go fly" in space. But for now, everyone was simply celebrating the achievement. 

"It all worked exactly as it was supposed to," Melvill said.