Indian-born scientist developing coated DVD's that can make hard disks obsolete


Sydney, Jul 8 (ANI): An Indian born scientist in the US is working on developing 
DVD's which can be coated with a light -sensitive protein and can store up to 50 
terabytes (about 50,000 gigabytes) of data.

Professor V Renugopalakrishnan of the Harvard Medical School in Boston has 
claimed to have developed a layer of protein made from tiny genetically altered 
microbe proteins which could store enough data to make computer hard disks 
almost obsolete.

"What this will do eventually is eliminate the need for hard drive memory 
completely," ABC quoted Prof. Renugopalakrishnan, a BSc in Chemistry from Madras 
University and PhD in biophysics from Columbia/State University of New York, 
Buffalo, New York as saying.

The light-activated protein is found in the membrane of a salt marsh microbe 
Halobacterium salinarum and is also known as bacteriorhodopsin (bR). It captures 
and stores sunlight to convert it to chemical energy. When light shines on bR, 
it is converted to a series of intermediate molecules each with a unique shape 
and colour before returning to its 'ground state'.

Since the intermediates generally only last for hours or days, Prof 
Renugopalakrishnan and his colleagues modified the DNA that produces bR protein 
to produce an intermediate that lasts for more than several years. They also 
engineered the bR protein to make its intermediates more stable at the high 
temperatures generated by storing terabytes of data.

This, they said, ultimately paved the way for a binary system to store data.

"The ground state could be the zero and any of the intermediates could be the 
one," he said.

Prof Renugopalakrishnan now opines that the protein layer could also allow DVDs 
and other external devices to store terabytes of information.

The new protein-based DVD will have advantages over current optical storage 
devices such as the Blue-ray as well, because the information is stored in 
proteins that are only a few nanometres across.

"The protein-based DVDs will be able to store at least 20 times more than the 
Blue-ray and eventually even up to 50,000 gigabytes (about 50 terabytes) of 
information. You can pack literally thousands and thousands of those proteins on 
a media like a DVD, a CD or a film or whatever," he said.

The high-capacity storage devices will be essential to the defence, medical and 
entertainment industries.

"You have a compelling need that is not going to be met with the existing 
magnetic storage technology," he added.

However, there's a flip side to it also.

"Science can be used and abused. Making large amounts of information so portable 
on high-capacity removable storage devices will make it easier for information 
to fall into the wrong hands. Information can be stolen very quickly. One has to 
have some safeguards there," he added.

The findings were presented at the International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in Brisbane this week. (ANI)