NASA scramjet smashes speed record
11:56 17 November 2004 
NewScientist.com news service 
Maggie McKee 
Enlarge image
The X-43A hypersonic aircraft is attached to the nose of a Pegasus booster rocket, itself attached to NASA's B-52B launch aircraft (Image: NASA)
Related Articles
Scramjet record attempt delayed by 24 hours
16 November 2004
Revolutionary plane prepares to set speed record
11 November 2004
NASA jet flies at seven times speed of sound
29 March 2004
Search New Scientist
Contact us
Web Links
X-43A, NASA 
Hyper-X program, NASA 
Hypersonic Technology missile program, Globalsecurity.org 
 

NASA's X-43A scramjet programme successfully smashed its own world speed record for aircraft by flying at nearly 10 times the speed of sound. The flight proves its radical, air-breathing engine can function at speeds of nearly 12,000 kilometres per hour.

The scramjet burned fuel for about 10 seconds off the southern California coast, US, to reach a speed of about Mach 9.6 (11,500 km per hour). It then glided for 10 minutes before diving into the Pacific Ocean.

It spent a total of about 20 seconds flying with its engine uncovered and gulping in air. That may seem like a very short flight to most people, but the X-43A team members were elated.

"What we've got today is a data set that dwarfs any other we've ever had at these Mach numbers," said Randy Voland, the propulsion team leader at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, US, in a post-flight briefing. Achieving Mach 10 conditions in ground tests is so difficult that it can only be done for milliseconds at a time, he said.
Fire in its belly 

The X-43A scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet) reaches rocket-like speeds but, unlike rockets, does not need to carry oxygen to ignite its fuel supply. Instead, it takes oxygen from the atmosphere. And unlike jet plane engines, which use fans to compress air, the X-43A uses no moving parts - the shape of its belly sucks in and compresses air at supersonic speeds. 

"There was a long time when nobody thought you could combust supersonically," said X-43A engineer Griff Corpening at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, California, US, in commentary during the flight. "It's absolutely overwhelming to see this come to a successful conclusion."

"It's got to be as good or better than the Boston Red Sox breaking the curse," said Joel Sitz, the X-43A project manager at Dryden, referring to the baseball team's recent win at the World Series - its first since 1918. 
Past and future

For Tuesday's flight, which had been postponed 24 hours due to electrical instrumentation glitches, the 3.7-metre scramjet was paired with a Pegasus rocket and carried to an altitude of 12 kilometres by a B-52B mother ship. 

At 1436 Pacific Standard Time, the plane and rocket were released and the rocket ignited. This boosted the pair to an altitude of about 34 km, where the scramjet was released for its brief supersonic flight.

NASA has flown two previous prototypes of the craft. The first had to be destroyed in June 2001 when its booster rocket veered off course. But in March 2004, the second craft set a new aircraft speed record of about Mach 7 (about 8400 km per hour) during an 11-second flight.

NASA's funding for future hypersonic flight research is uncertain, but Sitz says the near-Mach 10 flight may renew interest in the technology. "We've given industry and government a lot of confidence to go through with hypersonic flight."