 

Why the Strong Lose



JEFFREY RECORD

© 2005 Jeffrey Record

From Parameters,  Winter 2005-06, pp. 16-31.

The continuing insurgency in Iraq underscores the capacity of the weak to impose 
considerable military and political pain on the strong. Whether that pain will 
compel the United States to abandon its agenda in Iraq remains to be seen.

What is not in dispute is that all major failed US uses of force since 1945—in 
Vietnam, Lebanon, and Somalia—have been against materially weaker enemies. In 
wars both hot and cold, the United States has fared consistently well against 
such powerful enemies as Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, and the Soviet Union, but 
the record against lesser foes is decidedly mixed. Though it easily polished off 
Milosevic’s Serbia and Saddam’s Iraq, the United States failed to defeat 
Vietnamese infantry in Indochina, terrorists in Lebanon, and warlords in 
Somalia. In each case the American Goliath was militarily stalemated or 
politically defeated by the local David. Most recently, the United States was 
surprised by the tenacious insurgency that exploded in post-Baathist Iraq, an 
insurgency now in its third year with no end in sight.

The phenomenon of the weak defeating the strong, though exceptional, is as old 
as war itself. Sparta finally beat Athens; Frederick the Great always punched 
well above his weight; American rebels overturned British rule in the Thirteen 
Colonies; the Spanish guerrilla bled Napoleon white; Jewish terrorists forced 
the British out of Palestine; Vietnamese communists drove France and then the 
United States out of Indochina; and mujahideen handed the Soviet Union its own 
“Vietnam” in Afghanistan. Relative military power is hardly a reliable predictor 
of war outcomes.

Why do the strong lose? One must distinguish between general factors common to 
many cases of great-power losses to weaker adversaries and those that, I argue, 
may be peculiar to the United States. With respect to common causes of the 
stronger side’s loss to the weaker, Andrew Mack, in his pio-

16/17

neering 1975 assessment, argued that the place to look was differentials in the 
political will to fight and prevail, which were rooted in different perceptions 
of the stakes at hand. Post-1945 successful rebellions against European colonial 
rule as well as the Vietnamese struggle against the United States all had one 
thing in common: the materially weaker insurgent was more politically determined 
to win because it had much more riding on the outcome of war than did the 
stronger external power, for whom the stakes were lower. In such cases:

    The relationship between the belligerents is asymmetric. The insurgents can 
    pose no direct threat to the survival of the external power because . . . 
    they lack an invasion capability. On the other hand, the metropolitan power 
    poses not simply the threat of invasion, but the reality of occupation. This 
    fact is so obvious that its implications have been ignored. It means, 
    crudely speaking, that for the insurgents the war is “total,” while for the 
    external power it is necessarily “limited.” Full mobilization of the total 
    military resources of the external power is simply not politically possible. 
    . . . Not only is full mobilization impossible politically, it is not 
    thought to be in the least necessary. The asymmetry in conventional military 
    capability is so great and the confidence that military might will prevail 
    is so pervasive that expectation of victory is one of the hallmarks of the 
    initial endeavor.1

Superior strength of commitment thus compensates for military inferiority. 
Because the outcome of the war can never be as important to the outside power as 
it is to those who have staked their very existence on victory, the weaker side 
fights harder, displaying a willingness to incur blood losses that would be 
unacceptable to the stronger side. The signers of the Declaration of 
Independence risked their lives, fortunes, and sacred honor in what became a 
contest with an imperial giant for which North America was (after 1778) a 
secondary theater of operations in a much larger war. For the American rebel 
leadership, defeat meant the hangman’s noose. For British commanders in North 
America, it meant a return to the comforts and pleasures of London society and 
perhaps eventual reassignment.

The tables were reversed in Vietnam. There, the United States attempted to 
suppress a revolution against foreign domination mounted by an enemy waging a 
total war against a stronger power, a power for which the outcome of that war 
could never be remotely as important as it was to the insurgents. The United 
States could and did wreak enormous destruction in Viet-

17/18

nam, but nothing that happened in Vietnam could or did threaten core overseas US 
security interests, much less the survival of the United States.2 Thus, whereas 
the Vietnamese communists invested all their energy and available resources in 
waging war, US annual defense spending during the war averaged only 7.5 percent 
of the nation’s gross national product.3 Far more important to President Lyndon 
Johnson than securing South Vietnam was securing the enactment of his expensive 
Great Society program of social reform. Indeed, after he left the White House he 
bemoaned the resource competition between “that bitch of the war on the other 
side of the world” and “the woman I really loved— the Great Society.”4

Key Vietnam War players in the Johnson Administration grasped neither the 
disparity in interests and will that separated the United States and the 
Vietnamese communists nor its consequences. They could find no reason for the 
enemy’s tenacity and staying power. In 1965, US Ambassador to South Vietnam (and 
former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff) Maxwell Taylor marveled, “The 
ability of the Vietcong continuously to rebuild their units and make good their 
losses is one of the mysteries of this guerrilla war. We still find no plausible 
explanation for the continued strength of the Vietcong. . . . [They] have the 
recuperative power of the phoenix [and] an amazing ability to maintain morale.”5 
A year later, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara remarked to an acquaintance, 
“I never thought [the war] would go like this. I didn’t think these people had 
the capacity to fight this way. If I had thought they could take this punishment 
and fight this well, could enjoy fighting like this, I would have thought 
differently at the start.”6 Secretary of State Dean Rusk later confessed: 
“Hanoi’s persistence was incredible. I don’t understand it, even to this day.”7 
Even General William Westmoreland conceded that the US leadership 
“underestimated the toughness of the Vietnamese.”8

Reinforcing blindness to the fact and implications of the Vietnam communists’ 
commitment to total war was an ignorance of Vietnamese history and culture, an 
arrogant confidence in American ability to determine the future of South 
Vietnam, and a bad strategy. Indeed, superior political will—a greater 
commitment to the fight—would not, alone, seem sufficient to defeat a stronger 
enemy. Having even a significant edge in resolve cannot overcome a strategy that 
pits insurgent military weakness against the bigger enemy’s military strengths. 
The Tet Offensive was a military disaster from which the Viet Cong never 
recovered because communist forces came out in the open and tried to take and 
hold fixed positions, thereby exposing themselves to crushing US firepower. (The 
Taliban made the same mistake in Afghanistan 33 years later.) Tough is one 
thing. Tough and stupid is quite another.

Ivan Arreguin-Toft, in his seminal assessment of how the weak win wars, argues 
that “the best predictor of asymmetric conflict is strategic inter-

18/19

action,” and that “strong actors will lose asymmetric conflicts when they use 
the wrong strategy vis-à-vis their opponents’ strategy.”9 In his view, the 
strong actor has two strategies available: “direct attack,” aimed at destroying 
the weak actor’s armed forces and thereby his capacity to offer violent 
resistance; and “barbarism,” aimed at destroying the weak actor’s political will 
to fight via such depredations against noncombatants as crop destruction, 
roundups into concentration camps, hostage-taking, rape, murder, and torture. 
Two strategies are also available to the weaker side: “direct defense,” or the 
use of armed forces to thwart the stronger side’s attempt to capture or destroy 
the weaker side’s territory, population, and strategic resources; and “guerrilla 
warfare” (and its related strategy of terrorism), or “the organization of a 
portion of society for the purpose of imposing costs on an adversary using armed 
forces trained to avoid direct confrontation.”10 For both the stronger and the 
weaker sides, the direct approach targets the enemy’s armed forces, or capacity 
to fight, whereas the indirect approaches of barbarism and guerrilla warfare or 
terrorism seek to destroy the enemy’s will to fight.

Arreguin-Toft contends that the stronger side is most likely to lose when it 
attacks with a direct strategy and the weak side defends using an indirect 
strategy, all other things being equal. Why?

    Unlike direct strategies, which involve the use of forces trained and 
    equipped to fight as organized units against other similarly trained and 
    equipped forces, indirect defense strategies typically rely on irregular 
    armed forces (i.e., forces difficult to distinguish from noncombatants when 
    not in actual combat). As a result, an attacker’s forces tend to kill or 
    injure noncombatants during operations, which tends to stimulate weak-actor 
    resistance. Most important, because indirect defense strategies sacrifice 
    values [territory, population, resources, etc.] for time, they necessarily 
    take longer to resolve so long as weak actors continue to have access to 
    sanctuary and social support. In asymmetric conflict, delay favors the 
    weak.11

This was pretty much what happened in Vietnam. The United States opted for a 
direct “search-and-destroy” strategy against enemy field forces practicing (with 
the exception of Tet) an indirect strategy of guerrilla warfare.

19/20

The result, for the stronger side, was a politically intolerable protraction of 
bloody and indecisive hostilities. The British in North America also pursued a 
direct strategy against American forces, which were waging what amounted to a 
protracted guerrilla war. The Minutemen fought as irregulars, and General George 
Washington was careful not to risk the survival of the regular Continental Army. 
He was always prepared to run away from superior British force. Both the 
Vietnamese communist and American rebel leaderships understood a critical 
reality that their stronger opponents failed to grasp: the guerrilla can win 
simply by not losing, whereas the counterinsurgent power can lose by not 
winning.

Indirect defense via irregular warfare is in most cases the only sensible 
strategy for the weaker side, because a direct defense is an invitation to swift 
defeat. The principal elements of irregular warfare are protraction, attrition, 
and camouflage. Protraction and attrition are dictated by the conventional 
enemy’s military superiority. Because the weaker side has no hope of quick and 
decisive victory, it employs time and the steady infliction of casualties and 
other war costs to subvert the enemy’s political will to continue fighting. 
Protraction also requires a willingness to trade space and resources for time, 
because attempted territorial defense plays to the conventional enemy’s 
superiority in firepower. Camouflage, or the capacity to dissolve into the local 
population and terrain (natural and man-made), shields irregular forces from the 
potentially catastrophic consequences of the enemy’s firepower superiority and 
compels the enemy to inflict politically self-defeating collateral damage on the 
civilian population.

In the 20th century, Mao Tse-tung crafted a theory and practice of irregular 
warfare known as “protracted war” or “revolutionary war” that delivered 
communist victories in China and Indochina and inspired other insurgents 
elsewhere in the Third World. When the United States encountered this particular 
brand of irregular warfare in Vietnam, it grasped neither the essentially 
political nature of the conflict nor the limits of its own conventional military 
power in the Indochinese political and operational setting. It waged the only 
war it knew how to fight, but was stalemated by an enemy with a ferociously 
superior will to win and a strategy of warfare that denied decisive application 
of US military strengths.

The stronger side’s vulnerability to defeat in protracted conflicts against 
irregular foes is arguably heightened if it is a democracy. In his persuasive 
study of how democracies lose such wars, Gil Merom argues that “democracies fail 
in small wars because they find it extremely difficult to escalate the level of 
violence and brutality to that which can secure victory.”12 For democracies, the 
strategy of “barbarism” against the weaker side’s noncombatant social and 
political support base is neither morally acceptable nor, over time, politically

20/21

sustainable. Since 1945, wars against colonial or ex-colonial peoples have 
become increasingly unacceptable to most democratic states’ political and moral 
sensibilities. Merom says that “what fails democracies in small wars is the 
interaction of sensitivity to casualties, repugnance to brutal military 
behavior, and commitment to democratic life.” Democracies fail in small wars 
because, more specifically, they are unable to resolve three related dilemmas: 
“how to reconcile the humanitarian values of a portion of the educated class 
with the brutal requirements of counterinsurgency warfare, . . . how to find a 
domestically acceptable trade-off between brutality and sacrifice, [and] how to 
preserve support for the war without undermining the democratic order.”13

Dictatorships in the business of practicing brutality at home and unanswerable 
to public opinion do not share modern democracies’ vulnerability to defeat via 
protracted hostilities with a highly motivated irregular foe, which almost 
certainly explains why such war has been practiced more often against 
democracies than dictatorships. Insurgents seem to grasp democracies’ lower 
tolerance for such war. In his landmark study of suicide terrorism from 1980 
through 2003, Robert Pape discovered that, contrary to conventional wisdom, 
almost all suicide attacks during that period, including those in Iraq, were 
motivated primarily by nationalism and conducted against the territory or forces 
of democracies and quasi-democracies—specifically, the United States, France, 
India, Israel, Russia, Sri Lanka, and Turkey—perceived to be occupying, or 
supporting the occupation, of territory the terrorists considered to be their 
homeland. (Post-2003 suicide attacks in Spain and Great Britain, which 
participated in the US-led occupation in Iraq, are consistent with Pape’s 
findings.)

Pape believes that suicide terrorism, which, like guerrilla warfare, is “a 
strategy of coercion, a means to compel a target government to change policy,”14 
targets democracies for three reasons. First, democracies “are thought to be 
especially vulnerable to coercive punishment.” Their threshold of intolerable 
pain is lower than that of dictatorships. Second, democracies are believed to be 
more restrained than authoritarian regimes in their use of force, especially 
against noncombatants. “Democracies are widely perceived as less likely to harm 
civilians, and no democratic regime has committed genocide in the twentieth 
century.” Third, “suicide attacks may also be harder to organize or publicize in 
authoritarian police states.”15 Pape notes, for example, that not a single 
suicide attack was conducted in Iraq during the 25 years of Baathist rule, even 
though al-Qaeda and other radical Islamist groups regarded Saddam Hussein’s 
secular state as an apostate regime. Saddam Hussein effectively monopolized 
terrorism in Iraq.

The conclusion that democracies are softer targets of coercive insurgent 
violence than dictatorships would seem validated by Merom’s case stud-

21/22

ies of the Algerian War, the Vietnam War, and the Israelis in Lebanon. In all 
three cases the stronger side relied on conscripted armies that incurred 
substantial casualties, and in a democracy there is nothing so toxic in 
weakening domestic political support for limited war as dead and maimed 
conscripts. But hasn’t the United States shown that a democracy can reduce its 
vulnerability to weaker-side coercive violence via reliance on professional 
troops and on advanced military technologies that have lowered casualty rates to 
unprecedented levels?16 Democratic vulnerability to insurgent coercion is hardly 
a given in low-casualty fights waged by volunteer professionals.

Mack, Arreguin-Toft, and Merom offer path-breaking insights on the phenomenon of 
the strong losing to the weak. Disparities in strength of interest and 
willingness to sacrifice, the dynamics of strategic interaction, and the 
relative vulnerability of democratic states to coercion via properly conducted 
irregular warfare go a long way in explaining the outcome of many “unequal” 
wars, especially insurgencies conducted against foreign occupiers.

Most insurgencies fail, however, and few succeed without decisive external 
assistance. Curiously, neither of these facts, most importantly the issue of 
outside help, has drawn the attention of Mack, Arreguin-Toft, or Merom. The 
weaker side’s possession of superior will and strategy is hardly a guarantee of 
success. Substantial external assistance may be required to convert superior 
will and strategy into victory. Indeed, external assistance, be it direct or 
indirect, can alter the power relationship between weaker and stronger, and thus 
distort the very meaning of the two terms. Consider the following cases: the 
American Revolution, the Chinese Communist Revolution, the French-Indochinese 
War, the Vietnam War, and the Soviet-Afghan War.

The American War of Independence turned decisively against the British only 
after the formation of the Franco-American military alliance of 1778 and the 
subsequent French infusion of massive financial credits and munitions (most 
critically, artillery and gunpowder), and the dispatch to North America and its 
coastal waters of a powerful French army and fleet. Indeed, it was French forces 
ashore and afloat that sealed the fate of Cornwallis’s army at Yorktown, which 
in turn prompted the British to sue for peace.

As for the Chinese Communists, it is commonly believed that their victory was 
won without major external material assistance. To be sure, in August 1945 
Stalin began turning over to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) large stocks of 
Japanese war materiel which the Soviets had seized in Manchuria. By then, 
however, the Nationalist side was almost certainly doomed by 14 years of 
Japanese aggression and occupation, which greatly weakened Nationalist military 
forces and deprived the Nationalist government of control over most of China’s 
population and much of China’s terri-

22/23

tory. Though it was certainly not Japan’s intention to assist the Chinese 
Communists, the effect of Japan’s behavior in China did exactly that by 
weakening the Nationalists, probably fatally. Thus Mao profited immensely by 
outside help—albeit indirect and unintentional.

In the French-Indochina War, the insurgent Viet Minh were initially (1946-1949) 
isolated from outside assistance; they were short on military experience, poorly 
armed, and incapable of mounting the kind of major military operations that 
finally collapsed French political will in 1954. What turned the tide was the 
PLA’s victory in China in 1949 and subsequent conversion of the Sino-Vietnamese 
border into a conduit of major Chinese military assistance in the form of 
professional advisors and training teams, large quantities of small arms and 
military gear, and, most important, modern artillery captured from Nationalist 
armies.17 It was Chinese-supplied artillery that enabled the Viet Minh to crush 
the large French garrison at Dien Bien Phu, and it was the fall of Dien Bien Phu 
that produced the French political concessions at the Geneva Conference that 
ended French rule in Indochina and established communist rule in what became 
North Vietnam.

The subsequent and largely indigenous communist insurgency the United States 
faced in South Vietnam, culminating in the Tet Offensive of early 1968, had 
clear and mounting negative effects on public and congressional support for 
continued prosecution of the war. Tet shocked the American electorate, forced 
Lyndon Johnson from the White House, and compelled a reassessment of US war 
aims. During the Tet Offensive, however, the Viet Cong suffered horrendous 
manpower losses. By 1971 the insurgency had been substantially reduced and 
effectively contained by a combination of military action, ruthless 
counterterrorism, land reform, and major improvements in economic infrastructure 
and agricultural productivity. But this success counted for little, because by 
then the original insurgency had been replaced by a large and superbly armed 
conventional North Vietnamese army as the primary threat to South Vietnam’s 
survival. It was this army, not the Viet Cong, which brought South Vietnam down 
in 1975. South Vietnam was conquered by an external military force that had, 
especially after 1968, access

23/24

to massive logistical support from China and huge quantities of sophisticated 
weaponry from the Soviet Union.

The Soviets had their “Vietnam” in Afghanistan, where insurgent mujahideen 
profited significantly, perhaps decisively, from US and other external 
assistance, including thousands of Arab volunteers funneled through friendly 
Pakistan. Especially important was the US provision of Stinger surface-to-air 
missiles. The Stingers greatly reduced the effectiveness of Soviet heliborne 
operations, which formed the backbone of Soviet tactical mobility in 
Afghanistan.

It is, of course, impossible in any of these cases to determine with certitude 
whether external assistance was decisive, or even whether it contributed more to 
the weaker side’s victory than superior insurgent will and strategy. Fighting 
power is a mélange of measurables (e.g., troop strengths, weapon counts, sortie 
rates) and intangibles (e.g., generalship, organizational quality, morale). It 
seems reasonable to conclude that no amount of outside assistance could redeem 
the fortunes of a weak-willed and strategically incompetent insurgency. It seems 
no less reasonable to conclude that highly motivated and skilled insurgents can 
be defeated if denied access to external assistance and confronted by a stronger 
side pursuing a strategy of barbarism against the insurgency’s civilian 
population base. Here, the militarily defeated insurgencies of the Boers in 
South Africa, the Insurrectos in the Philippines, and the National Liberation 
Front in Algeria come to mind. (The irony of the Algerian War was that French 
political will to continue the war collapsed even as truly barbarous French 
military policies, including the widespread use of torture, were driving the 
insurgency toward defeat.)

The discussion so far has focused on factors that analysts regard as common to 
many, perhaps most, stronger-side defeats by materially weaker adversaries. But, 
of course, no two stronger sides are alike; each has its own history, culture, 
and way of war. Are there peculiarities in America’s history, culture, and way 
of war that further disadvantage a democratic United States in wars against a 
materially weaker irregular foe with superior will and strategy? I believe there 
are at least two. The first is the American tendency to separate war and 
politics—to view military victory as an end in itself, ignoring war’s function 
as an instrument of policy. The second is the US military’s profound aversion to 
counterinsurgency. Both combine to form a recipe for politically sterile uses of 
force, especially in limited wars involving protracted hostilities against 
weaker irregular opponents.

General Douglas MacArthur spoke for most Americans when he declared, in an 
address to a Joint Session of Congress on 19 April 1951: “Once war is forced 
upon us, there is no other alternative than to apply every available means to 
bring it to a swift end. War’s very object is victory, not pro-

24/25

longed indecision. In war there is no substitute for victory.”18 MacArthur had 
just been fired as commander of UN forces in Korea because he had publicly 
challenged President Truman to widen the Korean War by bombing and blockading 
mainland China, a course of action Truman and the Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed. 
They did not want an open-ended war with China at a time when Europe remained 
defenseless against a Soviet attack. MacArthur, on the other hand, rejected the 
very idea of politically restricted military operations. War was, for him, a 
substitute for policy, not its continuation.

This Jominian view underpins the conventional wisdom in the United States 
regarding the failed prosecution of the Vietnam War. Meddling politicians and 
Defense Department civilians, it is said, snatched defeat from the jaws of 
victory; if they had just gotten out of the way and let the military 
professionals do their job, the United States would have won the war. One need 
look no farther than the Gulf War of 1991 to see what happens when the civilians 
stand aside, so this reasoning goes, or no farther than Bosnia and Kosovo to see 
what happens when they resume their interference.

Conventional wisdom conveniently overlooks the reality that limited war 
necessarily entails restrictions on the use of force (and the 1991 Gulf War was 
no exception); otherwise, it would not be limited war. Military means are 
proportional to the political objective sought; thermonuclear weapons are not 
used against insurgency.19 Letting MacArthur attack mainland China would have 
involved a use of force excessive to the limited objective of restoring South 
Korea’s territorial integrity. Even in Operation Iraqi Freedom, whose object was 
the overthrow of a hostile regime via invasion of its homeland, extensive 
restrictions were placed on ground force size and aerial targeting.

Perhaps worse still, conventional wisdom is dangerously narcissistic. It 
completely ignores the enemy, assuming that what we do alone determines success 
or failure. It assumes that only the United States can defeat the United States, 
an outlook that set the United States up for failure in Vietnam and for surprise 
in Iraq. Custer may have been a fool, but the Sioux did, after all, have 
something to do with his defeat along the Little Big Horn.

Military victory is a beginning, not an end. Approaching war as an apolitical 
enterprise encourages fatal inattention to the challenges of converting military 
wins into political successes. It thwarts recognition that insurgencies are 
first and foremost political struggles that cannot be defeated by military means 
alone—indeed, that effective counterinsurgency entails the greatest discretion 
in the use of force. Pursuit of military victory for its own sake also 
discourages thinking about and planning for the second and by far the most 
difficult half of wars for regime change: establishing a viable replacement for 
the destroyed regime. War’s object is, after all, a better peace.

25/26

There can be no other justification for war. “Military conflict has two 
dimensions,” observe former presidential national security advisors Samuel 
Berger and Brent Scowcroft, “winning wars and winning the peace. We excel in the 
first, but without an equal focus on the second, combat victories can be 
lost.”20

The US military’s historical aversion to counterinsurgency is a function of 60 
years of preoccupation with high-technology conventional warfare against other 
states and accelerated substitution of machines for combat manpower, most 
notably aerial standoff precision firepower for large ground forces. Indeed, 
past evidence suggests a distance between the kind of war the United States 
prepared to fight and the kinds of war it has actually fought in recent decades. 
Hostile great powers, once the predominant threats to American security, have 
been supplanted by rogue states, failed states, and non-state actors—all of them 
pursuing asymmetrical strategies to offset US military strengths. This new 
threat environment places a premium on stability and support operations—i.e., 
operations other than the powerful conventional force-on-force missions for 
which the US military is optimized. Such operations include peace enforcement, 
counterinsurgency, stability, and state-building.

The need for such stability operations has been reinforced in the Iraq War, 
which, once again, has exposed the limits of conventional military power in 
unconventional settings. Operation Iraqi Freedom achieved a quick victory over 
Iraqi conventional military resistance, such as it was, but did not secure 
decisive political success. An especially vicious and seemingly ineradicable 
insurgency arose, in part because Coalition forces did not seize full control of 
the country and impose the security necessary for Iraq’s peaceful economic and 
political reconstruction. Operation Iraqi Freedom followed not only three 
decades of determined US Army concentration on conventional operations but also 
over a decade of steady cuts in active-duty US ground forces, especially Army 
infantry.21 Most stability and support operations, however, including 
counterinsurgency, are inherently manpower-intensive and rely heavily on special 
skills—e.g., human intelligence, civil affairs, police, public health, foreign 
language, foreign force training, psychological warfare—that are secondary to 
the prosecution of conventional warfare. Forces postured to achieve swift 
conventional military victory thus may be quantitatively and qualitatively 
unsuited for post-victory tasks of the kind that the United States has 
encountered in Iraq.

Antulio Echevarria, director of research at the US Army War College’s Strategic 
Studies Institute, believes the United States “is geared to fight wars as if 
they were battles, and thus confuses the winning of campaigns . . . with the 
winning of wars.” He further contends that “the characteristics of the US style 
of warfare—speed, jointness, knowledge, and precision—are better

26/27

suited for strike operations than for translating such operations into strategic 
successes.”22 Strategic analyst David Lonsdale observes that America’s strategic 
culture stresses “technological fixes to strategic problems” and “the increasing 
removal of humans from the sharp end of war,” resulting in post-modern warfare 
“in which precise, distant bombardment dispenses with the need to deploy ground 
forces in a combat role and thereby relegates them to a constabulary function.” 
He warns that “these notions are not only astrategic and ignore the paradoxical 
logic of strategy; they also implicitly rely on unrealistically effective 
operations, and thereby seemingly ignore the presence of friction.”23

Former West Point professor Frederick W. Kagan also believes that the primary 
culprit in delivering politically sterile victories is the US conception of war. 
The reason why “the United States [has] been so successful in recent wars [but] 
encountered so much difficulty in securing its political aims after the shooting 
stopped,” he argues, “lies partly in a ‘vision of war’ that see[s] the enemy as 
a target set and believe[s] that when all or most targets have been hit, he will 
inevitably surrender and American goals will be achieved.” Unfortunately, this 
vision ignores the importance of “how, exactly, one defeats the enemy and what 
the enemy’s country looks like at the moment the bullets stop flying.” For 
Kagan, the “entire thrust of the current program of military transformation of 
the US armed forces . . . aims at the implementation and perfection of this 
target set mentality.”24

But target destruction is insufficient and perhaps even counterproductive in 
circumstances where the United States is seeking regime change in a manner that 
gains support of the defeated populace for the new government. Such 
circumstances require large numbers of properly trained ground troops for the 
purposes of securing population centers and infrastructure, maintaining order, 
providing humanitarian relief, and facilitating revived delivery of such 
fundamental services as electrical power and potable water. Kagan continues:

    It is not enough to consider simply how to pound the enemy into submission 
    with stand-off forces. . . . To effect regime change, US forces must be 
    positively in control of the enemy’s territory and population as rapidly and 
    continuously as possible. That control cannot be achieved by machines, still 
    less by bombs. Only human beings interacting with human beings can achieve 
    it. The only hope for success in the extension of politics that is war is to 
    restore the human element to the transformation equation.25

Too much focus on the perfection of military means can cause the user to lose 
sight of the political purpose on behalf of which those means are being 
employed. Did the Pentagon simply lose sight of the main political objective in 
Iraq, which was not the destruction of Iraqi military forces but

27/28

rather the establishment of the requisite security environment for Iraq’s 
successful reconstruction? To be sure, the former was a precondition for the 
latter, but was the latter an especially, perhaps impossibly, tall order for a 
military not structured for the stability operations required in the aftermath 
of a swift conventional campaign?26

Accelerated military speed may in fact be strategically counterproductive. “The 
focus on high-intensity conflict means that the United States is winning wars 
faster and with fewer casualties,” observed Berger and Scowcroft. “But that 
‘transformation’ has had an unintended consequence. Rapid victory collapses the 
enemy but may not destroy it. Adversaries can go underground to regroup, 
creating a need for more troops for longer periods of time after combat ends.”27 
The highly respected British strategist Colin Gray contends that though “the 
transformational push may well succeed and be highly impressive in its military-
technical accomplishments, it is likely to miss the most vital marks.” Why?

    There are a number of reasons for this harsh judgment. First, high-tech 
    transformation will have only modest value, because war is a duel and all of 
    America’s foes out to 2020 will be significantly asymmetrical. The most 
    intelligent among them, as well as the geographically more fortunate and the 
    luckier, will pursue ways of war that do not test US strengths. Second, the 
    military potential of this transformation, as with all past transformations, 
    is being undercut by unstoppable processes of diffusion which spread 
    technology and ideas. Third, the transformation being sought appears to be 
    oblivious to the fact . . . that there is more to war than warfare. War is 
    about the peace it will shape. It is not obvious that the current process of 
    military transformation will prove vitally useful in helping to improve 
    America’s strategic performance. Specifically, the country needs to approach 
    the waging of war as political behavior for political purposes. Sometimes 
    one is moved to the despairing conclusion that Clausewitz wrote in vain, for 
    all the influence he has had on the American way of war.28

None of the foregoing is to argue against continued conventional military 
perfection. US conventional military primacy is inherently desirable because it 
deters enemy attack in kind and effectively eliminates conventional warfare as a 
means of settling disputes with the United States. These are no mean 
accomplishments. Conventional primacy also enables the United States to crush 
the conventionally weak and incompetent, like the Taliban in Afghanistan and the 
Baathist government in Iraq. Primacy, at least the kind sought by Pentagon 
transformationists, also permits increasing substitution of technology for 
blood, which in turn has reduced US casualty rates to historic lows and arguably 
increased public tolerance for the use of force overseas (a very mixed blessing, 
to be sure). The same primacy that has yielded conventional deterrence, however, 
has pushed America’s enemies

28/29

into greater reliance on irregular warfare responses that expose the limits of 
conventional primacy.

The policy question is not whether the United States should continue to maintain 
its conventional primacy, but whether, given the evolving strategic environment, 
it should create ground (and supporting air) forces dedicated to performing 
stability and support operations, including counterinsurgency. Forces and 
doctrine optimized for conventional warfare and the rapid application of intense 
violence are hardly optimized for the counterinsurgent mission, which demands 
the utmost restraint and discrimination in the application of force. Firepower 
is the instrument of last rather than first resort. There is no big enemy to 
close with and destroy, but rather the presence of threatened civilian 
populations that must be protected in ways that minimize collateral damage. 
Conventional ground force preparation for counterinsurgency requires major 
doctrinal and training deprogramming of conventional military habits and 
reprogramming with the alien tactics, doctrines, and heavy political oversight 
inherent in stability and support operations. Needless to say, forces so 
reprogrammed—commonly manpower-intensive and relatively low in firepower—will 
not be optimized for big, high-tech conventional conflicts.

Whatever the arguments for the establishment of forces dedicated to dealing with 
asymmetric threats (and there are serious arguments against), they are not 
likely to find favor in the Pentagon, which like any other large bureaucracy has 
organizational preferences based upon what it likes to do and does well. The 
United States is exceptionally good at conventional warfare but not particularly 
good at fighting irregular adversaries to a politically decisive finish. Marine 
Corps small-war expert Thomas X. Hammes points out that though war against an 
unconventional enemy “is the only kind of war America has ever lost,” the 
Defense Department “has largely ignored unconventional warfare. As the only 
Goliath in the world, we should be worried that the world’s Davids have found a 
sling and stone that work. Yet the internal DOD debate has largely ignored this 
striking difference between the outcomes of conventional and unconventional 
warfare.”29 Strategic Studies Institute analysts Steven Metz and Raymond Millen 
observe that while “the strategic salience of insurgency for the United States 
is higher than it has been since the height of the Cold War, [insurgency] 
remains challenging for the United States because two of its dominant 
characteristics— protractedness and ambiguity—mitigate the effectiveness of the 
American military.”30

Historically, in the two decades post-Vietnam, institutional resistance to 
counterinsurgency operations inside the US military was strong. This tendency 
was reinforced by a (proper) concentration on conventional warfare capabilities 
required to deter, and if necessary defeat, the massive threat posed by

29/30

the Warsaw Pact. A 2005 RAND Corporation study delivered to Secretary of Defense 
Rumsfeld concluded: “Iraq underscores . . . the overwhelming organizational 
tendency within the US military not to absorb historical lessons when planning 
and conducting counterinsurgency operations.” The study proceeded to recommend:

    In the future, US military forces engaged in counterinsurgency operations 
    must be composed of personnel with training and skills similar to special 
    operations forces, i.e., the language and culture of the country, and in the 
    critically important political, economic, intelligence, organizational, and 
    psychological dimensions of counterinsurgency warfare. Serious attention 
    should also be given to creating in the Army a dedicated cadre of 
    counterinsurgency specialists and a program to produce such experts.31

The argument here is not that the Defense Department is hopelessly unadaptable 
to the deconventionalized global strategic environment—only that its force-
structure bias toward conventional combat is long-standing and well entrenched, 
and that overcoming it will entail fundamental change in how US military forces 
are organized, equipped, manned, and trained.

Recent initiatives within the US Army may be a step in the right direction. The 
Army is in the midst of the most significant restructuring since World War II, 
as it moves to the Modular Force. The resulting changes in active and reserve 
forces are intended to provide units more effectively organized for both 
conventional operations and stability and support operations. Personnel policies 
have been adjusted to promote stabilization of units, teams, and leaders 
throughout the preparation for, conduct of, and return from combat operations. 
In recent years the Army also implemented a new officer management system that 
develops and promotes officers with the skills necessary for success across the 
full spectrum of military operations.

Even with such military changes, strategic success is not guaranteed. The 
strong, especially democracies, lose to the weak when the latter brings to the 
test of war a stronger will and superior strategy reinforced by external 
assistance. In the case of the United States in Vietnam, a weaker will and 
inferior strategy was reinforced by an apolitical conception of war itself and a 
specific professional military aversion to counterinsurgency. In the case of 
Iraq, the jury remains out on the issues of will and strategy, but the 
unexpected political and military difficulties the United States has encountered 
there seem to have arisen in part because of a persistent view of war as a 
substitute for policy and an antipathy to preparing for war with irregular 
adversaries.

NOTES

1. Andrew Mack, “Why Big Nations Lose Small Wars: The Politics of Asymmetric 
Conflict,” World Politics, 27 (January 1975), 181-82.

30/31

2. The chief argument for intervention in Vietnam was that failure to intervene 
would undermine the credibility of US defense commitments elsewhere. There is no 
evidence, however, that any major US ally in Europe or Asia saw Vietnam as a 
test of US credibility. On the contrary, many regarded US intervention in 
Southeast as a mistake that undermined US capacity to defend its commitments 
worldwide.

3. This is the average for years 1965-1974 and is based on figures appearing in 
Jeffrey Record, Revising U.S. Military Strategy: Tailoring Means to Ends 
(McLean, Va.: Pergamon-Brassey’s, 1984), p. 100.

4. Quoted in Doris Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1976), pp. 251-52.

5. Quoted in George McTurnan Kahin, Intervention: How America Became Involved in 
Vietnam (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1986), p. 249.

6. Quoted in Tom Wells, The War Within: America’s Battle Over Vietnam (New York: 
Henry Holt, 1994), p. 99.

7. Dean Rusk with Richard Rusk and Daniel S. Papp, As I Saw It (New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1990), p. 472.

8. Interview with Tom Wells, in Wells, The War Within, p. 99.

9. Ivan Arreguin-Toft, “How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict,” 
International Security, 26 (Summer 2001), 95.

10. Ibid., p. 35.

11. Ibid., p. 107.

12. Gil Merom, How Democracies Lose Small Wars: State, Society, and the Failures 
of France in Algeria, Israel in Lebanon, and the United States in Vietnam (New 
York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003), p. 15.

13. Ibid., pp. 230-31.

14. Ibid., p. 27.

15. Ibid., pp. 44-45.

16. During the eight years of major US combat operations in Vietnam, the United 
States sustained a daily average of 19 dead and 100 wounded; in Iraq, the 
average daily loss rate as of August 2005 was slightly over two dead and almost 
16 wounded. See Jeffrey Record and W. Andrew Terrill, Iraq and Vietnam: 
Differences, Similarities, and Insights (Carlisle, Pa.: US Army War College, 
Strategic Studies Institute, May 2004), pp. 11-12, 59; and data appearing on the 
Iraq Coalition Casualty Count website, http://icasualties.org/oif.

17. Qiang Zhai, China and the Vietnam Wars, 1950-1975 (Chapel Hill: Univ. of 
North Carolina Press, 2000), pp. 47-49.

18. Reprinted in Jay M. Shafritz, Words on War: Military Quotations from Ancient 
Times to the Present (New York: Prentice Hall, 1990), p. 425.

19. This does not mean that each and every restriction imposed on force is 
necessary and consistent with the political object being pursued. Civilian 
decisionmakers, especially those prone to err on the side of caution or 
captivated by notions of finite gradations of coercion, can and do get it wrong.

20. Samuel R. Berger and Brent Scowcroft, “The Right Tools to Build Nations,” 
The Washington Post, 27 July 2005.

21. See Robert M. Cassidy, “Back to the Street without Joy,: Counterinsurgency 
Lessons from Vietnam and Other Small Wars,” Parameters, 34 (Summer 2004), 73-83; 
John Waghelstein, “Counterinsurgency Doctrine and Low-Intensity Conflict in the 
Post-Vietnam Era,” in The American War in Vietnam: Lessons, Legacies, and 
Implications for Future Conflicts, ed. Lawrence E. Grinter and Peter M Dunn (New 
York: Greenwood Press, 1987), pp. 127-37.

22. Antulio J. Echevarria, Toward an American Way of War (Carlisle, Pa.: US Army 
War College, Strategic Studies Institute, March 2004), pp. 10, 16.

23. David J. Lonsdale, The Nature of War in the Information Age (New York: Frank 
Cass, 2004), pp. 9, 211.

24. Frederick W. Kagan, “War and Aftermath,” Policy Review, No. 120 (August-
September 2003), p. 27.

25. Ibid., pp. 44-45.

26. David C. Hendrickson and Robert W. Tucker, “Revisions in Need of Revising: 
What Went Wrong in the Iraq War,” Survival, 47 (Summer 2005), 27.

27. Berger and Scowcroft.

28. Colin S. Gray, “How Has War Changed Since the End of the Cold War?” 
Parameters, 35 (Spring 2005), 21.

29. Thomas X. Hammes, The Sling and the Stone: On War in the 21st Century (St. 
Paul, Minn.: Zenith Press, 2004), pp. 3, 5.

30. Steven Metz and Raymond Millen, Insurgency and Counterinsurgency in the 21st 
Century (Carlisle, Pa.: US Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute, 
November 2004), p. vi.

31. Iraq: Translating Lessons into Future DoD Policies (Santa Monica, Calif.: 
RAND Corporation, February 2005), p. 7.

Jeffrey Record is a professor of strategy at the Air War College in Montgomery, 
Alabama, and the author of six books, including Dark Victory: America’s Second 
War Against Iraq and Making War, Thinking History: Munich, Vietnam, and 
Presidential Uses of Force from Korea to Kosovo.

Go to Winter issue Table of Contents.

Go to Cumulative Article Index.

Go to Parameters home page.

Reviewed 22 November 2005. Please send comments or corrections to 
Parameters@carlisle.army.mil

