Montrose's Toast 

Scene: Confed Strategic Servives Fast Frigate Gorgon
The Bridge.

There is a custom with all the force of law. A 
tradition among starship crews that dictates quiet at the time of a Transition. 
The possibility of a misjump puts a cloak of quiet onto the most hardbitten of crews.

So it was the CSS Gorgon approached transition in near silence marred by
the bare minimum of necessary speech. And so it was that Captain Omar
Valencia of the Gorgon worked in silence and did his best to ignore the
observers on his bridge. Not that he really had much to say. Giving
orders to either of the two figures would have been problematical. 

The larger of the two had the bulk and broad shoulders of a Proximan, with a his
broad forehead and jaw surmounted by a mane of black hair and
a mutton chop set of silvered sideburns. His costume was Terran, though not
modern. For reasons known only to himself he was wearing the clothes of
a warrior from the feudal period of the last monarchy still extant on
Terra. And so, dressed in the clothes of a Samurai Daimyo complete with
weapons and fan, the Proximan Ambassador to the Confed watched.

The smaller was a Terran of mixed asian heritage. His
stillness masked many of his features so that any watcher was left with
an impression of a neat uniform, trim body, short cropped hair and dark
eyes. But those eyes belonged to the highest ranking military officer in
the Confederation, and the Captain's ultimate superior. If Commander
General Marion Sutaken choose to be on the bridge, he would not be
denied.

His thoughts were black and his mind was not truly on the bridge. An
experienced ship captain, he looked at the viewscreens without
registering anything about the ship's travel. He did not want to be
here. At least for this task. To send the highest ranking military
officer as a diplomat when the Confed was losing a war struck him as a
poor choice of tactics. Of course, when the Confed council said unto
you, "goest there and toil", you did. And, he had to admit, the Confed
Senate usually made the right choice, sooner or later. 

He wondered if the Senate realized just how much we depend on that illusion of
correctness. The Confederation is too young for the Senate to be able to
depend on habits of obedience. He sent his people out for rearguard and
holding actions and they went, but they went because they believe in the
Confed and the Senate that guided it. If they held, it was because the
Senate would not make their sacrifice a vain one. If that illusion
shattered, so did the Confederation.

But he couldn't say that the Senate was playing a conservative hand in this
game. The Senate Hall was probably still vibratng from the last debate before
he boarded ship. The Alphan protests alone raised the roof. Melodiously, but they
did scream. He looked up to the monitors at the status lights for the
other vessels in the convoy and its escort. A total of three frigates to
escort thirteen merchant and factory ships including GMHD's Innovation.
And each of the escorts carried an MI cadre member, any of which could
reproduce the entire training machine of the Mobile Infantry.

The convoy was a tactic of desperation but, if it worked, it promised 
to change the face of the war and the Confederation itself. He was glad 
he was only responsible for the war and not the social aftermath. 

But of course, he thought, all of this could have been done by a 
experienced diplomat. It didn't really reqire a ship's captain turned 
ground pounder. That he was on this ship was the direct result of the 
Proximan Ambassador's intervention. He turned his head toward the 
author of his sorrows. The ambassador canted his head and gave 
an open smile. Sutaken looked back to the screens as the helmsman 
called out. 

"Approaching the Proximan exchange station"

The captain responded with a request for local view and the bridge was
treated to a view of the largest single space station in the
Confederation. Still under construction, the ship encrusted station drew
the eye like no other he had seen. A wheel world in its own right, the
Proximan Empire's exchange station was the only gateway for trade and
information going to and from the Empire. No non-Proximan ship had ever
gone beyond this point. And to insure that, there were seven Proximan 
dreadnaughts in patrolling orbit. Their crab like shape lent them an impression 
of predatory speed and power. 

His sympathy, unspent for the Captain whose domain he had invaded, went out 
to the Captains of the dreadnaughts. The Alphan-Terran alliance never 
came close to this during the last war and now they must let the convoy 
pass or be foresworn, as he understood it.

He shook himself and caught the Ambassador's eye again. With a nod 
to that worthy he started toward the door. With a yell of "officer on the 
bridge" the CSS sentry palmed the door open and saluted. The ambassador 
joined him as he stepped through. The door slid shut on the sound of the 
astrogation officer's call of "transition , one hour".

The ambassador raised his hands in a cupping gesture that Marion had 
come to recognize as a query. Marion held up a security chip. "There is 
news from the Senate and I should have a final talk with my people. You are 
welcome to join me". The ambassador nodded and grinned. "It would be a 
honor at all times".

They walked down to the corridor to the simply marked "Flag Conference
Room". Their eyes met briefly before turning toward the door. Marion
touched the doorplate.

A parade ground bellow of "Marshall on the field" caused many of the
occupants to jump as all of the Mobile Infantry in the room came to taut
attention. The tableau held for a second. That freeze of motion
highlighted the differences in the room's occupants. For one, the MI
were men apart. Literally apart. There were no others within a meter of
any of the MI scattered across the room. The civilians, while apart from
the MI, themselves were separted into groups according to alleigience.
Business Corp in one corner, mining Corp in another, newsies in another.

Marion's stacatto "at ease" caused only the merest easing of tension as
MI and civilian headed for places at the central table. More than a few
of the Corp reps were clearly uncomfortable with military protocol. The
MI scattered themselves around the table. His backwatchers, one a
veteran and the other squeaky new, settled themselves to bracket him and
the ambassador. Alan Cardi, his aide of many years, took the seat at the
other end of the conference table. The other three took the seats
closest to them. The News reps settled next and the rest followed. 

Marion smiled. "Greetings gentles". "I hope your trip over was
comfortable." He looked down to his handheld. "I beleive that you have
all recieved your downloads from the last mail packet. If that is the
case let me quickly bring you up to date on some relevant news and then
we can jump right into the mission briefing." A pause. "From this moment
forward this ship is under a communications blackout." A stir of
confusion. "You have all recieved some sort of basic briefing from your
immediate superiors. It is my hope that the briefing was sufficiently
inaccurate enough to mislead anyone tracking your actions and
utterances." "Your real briefings are now being downloaded to your 
handhelds." Another stir. "I suggest you take a good long time to walk through 
them and think carefully about the ramifications. I assure you that those 
who put them together did."

"In 12 hours I will be holding question and answer session for all
concerned in this room. Until that time, rooms have been provided for
you on deck 2. There are a group of naval ratings outside waiting to
show you to those rooms. " With that he stood up and nodded. "Until then
gentles." With that clear dismissal the civilians stoop up and prepared
to go. The MI stayed put. 


Scene1: On entrance to the system in a fast Corvette

	Sutaken talks to his back watchers 
	They are the first humans to land on Proxima
	

Scene2: On the Shuttle down to the planet

	Meets with their Proximan advisor.
	Get news release from Terra
		Olympics are restarted.
		Elysians manage to get it classified according to ability, not gender
	

Scene3: On the landing dock.

	Meets with the Proximan Emperor

Scene4: 
