WHO-backs-genetic-experiments-with-smallpox
18:15 12 November 2004 
NewScientist.com news service 
Debora MacKenzie 
Related Articles
Bioterror simulations back targeted treatment
17 February 2004
US develops lethal new viruses
29 October 2003
US smallpox vaccination plan grinds to a halt
22 August 2003
Search New Scientist
Contact us
Web Links
Smallpox, WHO
Smallpox, CDC
DA Henderson, University of Pittsburgh
 

Scientists who advise the World Health Organization have decided to allow 
researchers to work with live, genetically modified smallpox virus, and to put 
smallpox genes into other viruses. The aim will be to find better drugs and 
vaccines against smallpox.

But some smallpox experts think the work is pointless, as no one is likely to 
develop or stockpile any drug or vaccine discovered, and it may set an 
undesirable precedent. The decision to allow the research must be approved by 
the WHO’s member countries at their assembly in May 2005.

The WHO declared in 1980 that smallpox had been eradicated, after a global 
vaccination campaign. It permitted only two labs to keep stocks of the Variola 
virus that causes smallpox: the US Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, and 
Vector, the Russian State Research Center for Virology near Novosibirsk.

All work with the virus at the two labs must be approved by the WHO’s advisory 
committee on Variola research, which insists that the benefits must outweigh the 
risk of smallpox escaping. Significant reservations

In 2003, US scientists asked the committee for permission to insert a “marker” 
gene into the virus, and to transplant its genes into other viruses in the same 
“orthopox” family. The committee had “significant reservations” about the work. 

But at a November meeting it approved the research in principle. Each study must 
still be approved individually by the committee, as well as the relevant local 
biosafety authorities, says Geoffrey Smith of Imperial College London, who 
chaired the meeting.

In one kind of experiment scientists will insert the gene for a fluorescent 
protein from jellyfish into the Variola genome - so the live virus will light 
up, and the dead virus will not. This will allow large numbers of potential 
antiviral drugs to be screened rapidly for their ability to kill Variola. 

“That means the staff of the lab will be working with live Variola virus for a 
shorter time,” says Smith. Lab workers pose the greatest risk as a potential 
escape route for the virus.

In the other experiment approved, single genes from Variola will be transplanted 
to other orthopoxes. But the aim will not be to see how they make smallpox so 
deadly.

“That is off-limits,” says Smith. The idea is to test antiviral drugs that 
target specific viral enzymes, for example the enzyme that replicates its DNA, 
against a virus carrying the true Variola enzyme. 

“This is all aimed at finding better drugs and vaccines,” says Smith.

But DA Henderson of the University of Pittsburgh, who led the drive to eradicate 
smallpox and chairs the WHO’s committee on orthopoxes, calls the research 
“pointless”.

As long as smallpox is a theoretical threat, and any drugs developed cannot be 
tested in people, he says, “No one is going to spend the billions of dollars it 
will take to develop and stockpile any new drugs or vaccines they discover.”

Henderson told New Scientist the experiments could pose unknown risks. The 
transplanted Variola gene must not alter the biology of the host virus, 
stipulates the committee. But, asks Henderson: “How do you know?”

