From: uunet!juliet.ll.mit.edu!alexj

Just had a thought:
One reason that recovery might be so fast is because you don't have 
to put any power behind the recovery.. When you strike out you are not 
JUST putting in enough power to get the wweapon there, you are also 
pouring in the power and effort to impart kinetic energy to the opponent.
On the return you can put all the damage into speed!  It also takes energy
to target and direct a weapon.  The retrun requires very little conscious 
aiming of the weapon and thus can also be done faster.


                                        Alex

From: glhodge (Geoffrey L. Hodge)

        Jim, why, in the space of one letter do you refer to me as Jeff, 
Geoff, and Hodge?  (Just curious).

        Alex, I think recovery times will be very hard to pin down.  I am
not really basing my ideas on hard data, just on impressions and intuition,
so hard data would be welcome.  Jym, do you still have copies of your IQP
tapes?  One of the things I based recovery times on was my brief experience
with Shotokan and fencing.  In Shotokan I felt that I was able to couch one
hand in just about the time it took the other one to block or punch.  It may
only be that I was completely inexpeienced, but it didn't feel to me that
my recovery times were 1/2 or 1/4 of the strike speed.  I may not be the best
example of a Shotokan student, however :-)
        Again, Alex, I have no hard data, but I wouldn't think that aiming
at a target would slow the strike down that much.  Perhaps a "called shot"
would (and does, sort of, by decreasing the % chance), but most attacks in
both our systems are thrown against fairly general locations.  This point
may be true, I don't know, though.  I find your other suggestion--that 
putting energy behind the attack (so as to do damage) actually slows down
the action--to be counter-intuitive.  I can't say you are wrong, but it makes
sense to me that that would actually speed the strike up.  After all, F=MA.
(Not bad for a liberal arts grad, huh?  :-)

        Gimm, I agree that kata should increase speed, and that they should
be "paid for."  The way I run kata is that the kata acts as a "quick strike"
skill if the actions are done in sequence.  The more actions in the kata,
the less of a benefit you get from it.  In fact, a long kata at low ranks
will actually slow you down instead of helping.  I think this is realistic.
That's so many white belts get their butts kicked by people who just rely
on instinct.  Do you mean that the actions should be more detailed?  Alex
currently requires you to state the type of action, any support skills, and
high, medium or low (is that right, Alex?).  I think that is pretty specific.
I would not ask for greater detail, but that is just my opinion.

        You say you don't think Uechi-ryu teaches "fight from press" skills,
but instead just teaches you to fight at a comfortable range for your style.
I guess it's all relative.  I'm sure you don't feel like you are at a press,
but I bet the average guy on the street would when they started taking
Uechi, or if they ever had to fight you.  Tae Kwon Do people probably don't
think of themselves as "fighting from a retreat," but in a game system, I
think that might be the best way to model what they are doing.
        Well, actually, that is a bad example.  There are really two issues--
press/retreat, and weapon length.  Kicks (in Taliesin anyway) have a greater
weapon lenght than hand techniques.  If a TKD person fought a boxer, either
the TKDist would feel "too close" or the boxer would feel "too far away."
This is not a case of press or retreat, just of different weapon lenghts.
*In game terms* I model this by saying that if the boxer wants to punch at
a comfortable distance, he allows the TKDist be at a press (in regard to
kicks).  If the TKDist is at a comfortable kicking range, he will appear to
the boxer to be "in a retreat" in terms of punching.
        Similarly, if you stuck a Uechi person against a boxer, the boxer 
would probably feel that the Uechi person was "too close" or the Uechi
student would feel that the boxer was "too far away."  When I said that I
thought that Uechi teaches "fight from press" skills, I arbitrarily set a
standard punch as the "normal" range.  That means that Uechi usually fights
in a press, and TKD and Shotokan would fight from a retreat, in game terms.
Do you think this is a decent way to model the different ranges, or have I
missed your point entirely?

        Giomm:  you ask what makes a retreat desirable.  Do you mean in a
game or in real life?  In real life, it may not be an advantage, but it 
decreases the chances either person will be hit.  I think it is similar in
game terms.  The only reasons I can think of for a retreat to be 
_strategically_ desirable are  1) if you have a longer weapon  2) if you
don't want to get hurt.  I think #2 plays a bigger part in real life.

        Do you think that fighting in a press should bring a negative mod
to hit?  Do you find people of other styles have a hard time striking you
when you close to a comfortable Uechi range?

        When you say that a sidekick=roundhouse=crescent (except slower)
you mean in terms of damage?  You are right, I have been talking to TKDists.
I listed those as separate not because of the damage differential, but 
because they may be used differently.  A sidekick hits the opponent from
the front, but a roundhouse hits him from the flank.  I don't know what a
crescent is good for, they seem sort of useless to me.
        I have been told that the side thrust kick is the most powerful
kick.  Have you found differently, or is it just that the difference between
a side thrust, roundhouse and crescent is negligable?
        Finally, why do you say that a "snap" (rotating the hips or shoulders)
has no effect on power?  Many styles seem to feel it does (although many
others obviously don't).  Do you have IQP data on this?  If so, I'd love
to see it.  I'm not above basing my system on facts every now and then :-)

        I thought of a couple more unarmed combat techniques.  Bite, and
"leg hold."  Leg holds cover scissors holds and grapevines from wrestling.
I suspect most of these techniques will be seldom used support skills.  
Punch, kick and block will remain the primary skills for most martial arts.
I just want to try to cover everything.  Can you think of any unarmed 
attacks or techniques I haven't covered?  Anyone?

                                                        -Jeff (not Geoff)

From: uunet!juliet.ll.mit.edu!alexj

        You know- this is been very heavy.  I am getting a lot of neat 
input out of this. I like it!  I have a request.  Let's put a SUBJECT 
header in to indicate that it is mail that is part of this discussion.  
        I have been busy of late but very distracted by this wonderful 
conversation!  Let us call it DESIGN or something like that.  What do you 
say? 
        Second, let us be explicit as to whether we are referring to
BT(Bardic Tales), TL(Taleisin), or SH(Space Hybrid).
        Third, do not say "you" said.  Say "Jeff" said, or "MArk" said 
because there are so many of us now.  I wait for breaks at work or lunch 
and then respond so I may be answering more than one post and thus multiple 
authors.
        Just some ideas for you to ignore or like...

ON PARRY/BLOCK

Jeff says:
>Parries better at linear attacks, blocks better at arcing,
>swinging attacks

        True- but a parry against a swing attack can be devastating if 
successful.  

ON PRESS
>The "normal" range in
>Taliesin will be that where the weapon is most effective.  I think Alex has
>the normal range set at what I would call a light retreat.  I believe he is
>trying to model the fact that most normal people are a bit tenative about
>closing right into a slugfest (is that right, Alex?).

        Absolutely.  It has little to do with being tenative though.  I chose
what you would call a light retreat as my baseline simply because we need a 
relative starting point.   Every fighting style I know, and most normal
fights I have seen(not many), are at a light retreat most of the time.
This is where people tend to be.  Only beserkers and people who are "bricks"
do not stay ta that range.  If you are fighting in a rnage where the person
damage you without moving forward then you are unsafe and the fight will 
denigrate into a bloodbath.  Look at Fencing, Shotokan, Aikido, Boxing-
you name it.  All of them fight at that "moderate retreat".  [ACtually
Shotokan fights at a stage three or even greater retreat but that is one
of the styles peculiarities.  ]  What about Tae-Kwon-Do, Phil?  Uechi_ryu, 
Jim?

        I think the reason for that is that is that if you are fighting 
that close you have far less timew to see an incoming attack and react to it.
Now, if we accept that as the most common place to fight from, it makes
sense to make that the base for spacing.  That way the majority of players 
won't have to figure out light retreat into their numbers and can just use 
their base numbers.    That is why I think the "moderate retreat" should be
the base.  


ON DICE

Yea- what Jeff and Jim said!  A base plus two dice gives the "Blessed Curve"
and a base amount.  The only think about that is that you have to tailor 
your partial success rules(whatever they may be) to allow for nicks and
grazing shots.  

ON GRAPPLE AND OVERBEAR

In my discussions of this topic I think I have unconsiously sowed the 
wrong seed. ALthough I said I didn't mean it.  
Overbear can use just as much SKILL as Grapple.  Grapples are techniques 
that utilize flexibility, coordination, and agility to hold/throw/release
whatever.  Overbears are techniques that utilize strength and weight for 
that purpose.  They are stylistically different.  An Aikido floor sweep and a 
Football player's tackle are both high commitment throws.  One relies on
pulling out the balance point, the other relies on pushing over the balance
point.  They do the same thing(though a tackle is higher commitment, but 
easier)  There is a distinction, but I am no longer convinced it is worth 
modeling.  I am wavering and could go either way....

ON TL MARTIAL ARTS

It is funny because Jeff is moving to the more specific as I go the more 
general. ;-) 

        Some issues:
>roundhouse kick, crescent kick, axe kick,
        Unless you are going to go into some seriously detailed combat 
mechanics these kicks are essentially the same!   They hit with different
parts of the foot, and have some slightly different special effects 
attached to them(roundhouse kick is a little [very little] faster but has a 
more limited target range; crescent kicks are easier to do to a higher target
and it is easier to clear an obstacle you would kick over, they are also
better at opposite flank kicks...; axe kicks are a bitch to block, but take
a little longer, and foreshadow more.)  

>hook/slap kick

        What do you mean by that?  And how do you differentiate it from an
axe kick? 

>knife/ridgehand
        I would tend to make a ridgehand/knife the same as a punch
unless you are going to differentiate linear crushing attacks and circular
(swinging) crushing attacks.

>side/back kick
        I would call this a "Foot(kick)" made to the back or to the side.
It could have support skills like "Kick to back" or "Kick to side".
I f a support skill gets better than a primary I let it be used as the 
primary so effectively you could have a style with just backkicks, or 
whatever.

On the matter of combat techniques:
        What about instant attack(streams of actions with reaction rolls);
parry, florentine, off-hand/foot, bash(this is how I distinguish thrust
kicks from snap kicks- I chose to make snap kicks the base and use the 
General Combat ability to put more overbear into a strike to cover thrust
kicks.), and called shots.  How about Toughness, stat enhancements(Uechi),
attack-while-moving...

I think some styles have defense or perception as their major components.
(Aikido).

DOn't forget the styles that have mystical "bullshit"- and in the case of 
Taliesin- MAGIC.  Ki Focus, Enhance Damage, Blind Fighting, QUivering Palm,
Doing hand-to-hand damage over a distance, Great Shout, Ki BAttles,etc.

ON SUPPORT SKILLS

        In BT:  What do you guys think of directly alowing General Skills 
to enhance support skills.  That could mean that if Chuck is doing a block,
and both block and punch are in the general skill he would get 6% per rank!


ON RELATED SKILLS
Jim says:
>       I have decided to make related skills on option. They do not reflect
>    reality but they do allow a player to save his bacon sometimes.

        I am not sure.  There is something to Related skills.  To those
confused, a BT Related Skill is a skill that is close enough to the primary 
skill that a percentage of it can be applied to the success chance INSTEAD of 
the that primary skill.  Example:

        I have a RANK 5 in drive truck.  I jump in the the car. I have RANK 1
in DRive car.  They are RELATED at 4/5.  This means when I calculate ourt
my chance to drive car, I can use 4/5 of my truck RANK to drive the car
INSTEAD OF the RANK 1 in DRive Car.  

        It is useful because if you can drive a truck at rank 5 you can CERTAINLY drive a car at least 60-80% of your chance.  However they are not
really additive- you shouldn't get 3/4 or 4/5 of your truck RANK to add to your
CAR rank because the principles are very similar.  So a related skill is 
a non-additive replacement skill for a primary.  
        One response to taht is that drive car and drive truck should be the 
same skill and it should all be handled by a grossly complex system of 
handling familiarity with applications of the skill.  WAHHHHH!


ON SKILL RELATIONSHIPS

Jim says:
>       I think we need to start jumping back and look at what you are 
>    trying to model. I need some real examples before I can be 
>       convinced that tertiary skills exist.

OKAY.....Fair enough.  Let us talk about BT:

GENERAL SKILLS:
        I think it is clear that general skills exist.  A
general skill is an umbrella skill that creates a little mini-level-factor
for a limited set of skills that are more related than the level factor 
gives them credit for.  Knowledge of a martial art is my best example of 
that.  I think we all agree that General skills exist, right?  Level
fatcors are not very large a factor- I honestly don't think all skillscan be
grouped accurately into 12 level factors.  The granularity on that is fairly 
high!

SUPPORT SKILLS:
        I think this isn't a problem either.  SUPPORT skills tend to 
give the user more proficiency at handling a particular variation on
a primary skill.  If you always train to punch at double speed you will 
be better at punching double speed than a person who always punched at 
normal speed.  ENuff said....

        Except Mark, in the cause of simplicity, has made support skills
level factor wide.  In othe rwords if you have Quickstrike(PCF) you can
apply that to nay PCF skill.  I think that was a hasty decision.  MAybe 
applying it to the General skill the primary goes in would be better. 

I currently apply it only to the primary selected by the user, and it can
be applied to related skills at the appropriate percentage.

SECONDARY SKILLS:

        Here is where it gets tough.  I firmly believe in secondary skills!
Let us take a fictional ee we will call Mark.  Please note, Jeff that all 
three of these skills are in different areas!  In TL, as I understand it,
a secondary must be in the same area.

        Mark has "lore: ee"(8), "electrical ops."(8), and "circuit 
design"(8).  When MArk is making a circuit design role he is probably better
with his Lore: ee than a guy who is making the same circuit and does not 
have the skill lore: ee.  WOuldn't you say?  And I think he probably
has an edge in having a practical knowledge of electronics.  These are both
secondaries.  They are other skills the player has that would positively 
enhance his chance with that particular skill.  I agree that they must be 
carefully picked but I think they are there.

Let us take another example:  Mark has a foil skill of 5(;-)), Alex has a 
foil skill of 5 as well(;-);-)) and he has a 4 in saber and and a 4 in epee.
All else between them is equal(;-);-);-)).  They are both required to make a 
thrust with the foil at a target(a straight use of the primary foil skill). 
 It is my opinion that ALex will have a higher success chance than Mark will- 
above and beyond the 2% that his PCF is higher than MArks.  
I feel that this is the result of secondaries.  

ON TERTIARIES
        Tertiaries are merely souped down secondaries.  They cover the fact 
that some skills DO contribute but maybe not as much as a secondary would.
They cover things like Electrical Ops.  maybe in the EE example above.  
Things that have an impact but maybe not as major a one as 3% per RANK say!

ON PERCEPTION

Jim says:
>       Why does a passive perception take no time and get 50% of the 
>       chance ? Why is the rule for handling passive perception so simple
>   and the rules for active perception so much more complex ? 

        It isn't that simple- it is just taht you must know what the active 
perception number is before cutting it in half to generate passive perception.

        The reason passive perception if 0 time is because in real life we 
are perceiving all the time, every count!  The fact is that a person can 
register somehting without actually putting conscious mental activity to it
or placing it in his/her que of things "to do".  It is a reflection of the 
fact that the system is not granular enough to handle the whole process of
intepretation of sensory data that is constantly going on.  
        Ithink it is foolish to not just giv epeople passive perceptions
on a regular basis when you rae not sure if they are going to catch something 
or not.  

ON REACTION SPEED

How does speed work in SH Jim?  COuld you tell us what you currently have 
implemeted?  I know we all have a copy of TL, vers 2, and we all are 
completely all over BT initiative;-)!

ON KATA

I REALLy like the idea that KATA don't give that much bonus chance to do
the skills(maybe a tertiary-1%?) but give SPD bonuses!  WHat do you guys 
think of that?
        Her eis a skeletal draft for BT:

        Organization is as Jim and I set it up:  An ordered sequence of 
actions that specify mid, high, or low level of target; any support
skills utilized; and facing(what direction the attacks goes in).

        The Kata skill(a different skill for each Kata but all contributed 
to by the General skill for that set of actions) would be a secondary to
the skills within it and would give (RANK-2) to all actions within the
Kata.  Notivce this makes attempting to use a KAta until RANK 2 slower than 
just using the skill normally- a very realistic effect. 

        Kata would be dififcult to learn AND they would be more and more 
difficult base don how many moves they contain.

ON RETREATING
Jim says:
>       Lets stop and think for a second. What does retreat give you
>    that would allow you to think of it as desirable ? I am not
>    saying it is not. I just want to hear what people think.

        Look at SHotokan for the answer to that.  Shotokan fights in a 
retreat because its primary attack technique allows it to cover the 
distance into melle range quickly.  Being at a retreat makes it really
hard for the opponent to hit you(unless thay have similar skills).  ALso,
if you want to draw out a battle, refusing to fully commit allows you to 
last longer(as well as your opponent).  The other thing is that you can 
step back and plan, or clear your head in a high retreat because you know 
your opponent can't immediately strike at you.  
Those are some of the reasons.

Enough!  See you soon!  This is VERY useful!


                                                Alex


From: uunet!umassmed.UMMED.EDU!glhodge (Geoffrey L. Hodge)

        Aliks: :-)  When I refered to my experience in fencing and Shotokan,
I was not talking about lunges or great blows.  The effects of recovering
from a lunge are obvious.  I was just talking about the exercises we did in
practice.  You know the Shotokan drills where you just stand in horse stance
and punch and block over and over?  When I did those, I felt that my
"recovering" hand got couched just about the same time my punch would have 
landed.  Perhaps I could have sped it up (perhaps not), but I couldn't
do that without concentrating on that hand.  The beauty of recovery is
that it requires less thought than attacking.  I think that means that less
effort is put into making it happen quickly, but this is just based on my
experiences.  My argument is not whether recoveries *can* be faster than
attacks, only whether they usually are.
        You (Alycz :-) make an interesting point about the arm continuing
the strike even after it has impacted.  Maybe that is part of our difference
of opinion.  Some of that time is still the strike, but some of it is the
recovery time.  I don't think we will ever get hard evidence good enough
to break actions into 1/4 or 1/5 of a second.  I will probably say the
strike is ended when it has impacted fully.  The recovery begins automatically
on the next segment, taking a time equal to the attack.  Critical misses,
block or parries will slow recovery time.  Realistically, these situations
probably require the person to re-react.  People expect to hit, miss, be
blocked or parried, but they don't expect "criticals."  In game terms
I think it would be too cumbersome to make people re-react for recoveries,
so I will just stick some extra time onto their recoveries instead.

        Alex, yes and no, I both do and don't want to be "that complex"
with my combat techniques.  I intend to make "Kick" the primary skill.  I
expect most people to be happy with that.  If somebody does want to be a
martial artist, or if someone does need to hit the side of the head with
a kick, I would like to have some system in place to cover those things.
In other words, yes, please send me your list of various hand techniques.
I will hopefully be able to condense them to a few basic ideas, or maybe
even cover them with what I already have, but I would like to know what
they are.

        I think I chose the term "snap" poorly.  I agree with Alex about
the kinetics of snap kicks vs. thrust kicks, but that isn't what I was 
talking about.  Forget the word "snap."  What I wanted to cover is the
technique of rotating the body roughly 1/4 turn during an attack.  It is
not as powerful as a spin, but many styles claim that it adds force to
an attack.  From a front stance, a rear leg kick will have more force than
a front leg kick, and stepping into a punch will generate more force.
Many styles encourage students to swivel their hips and/or shoulders during
an attack to add extra power.  This is what I was trying to model.  I 
don't know if it can be done with just that one skill.  If Jym is right,
it might not be worth modeling at all.

                                                        -Jeff

From uunet!sbcs.sunysb.edu!pmt Wed Aug 28 19:46:14 1991

>From alexj@juliet.ll.mit.edu Wed Aug 28 17:13:15 1991
>
>In real life most shots are, IMO, called shots.  We just don't call them 
>that.  People really don't just swing and randomly impact a part of a 
>person's body.

I agree.
Have you ever watched two good black-belts go at it?  They don't attempt
to attack every 2d10 segments.  They circle around, wait for openings, then 
strike when they might be effective.  I don't think any of the game systems
I've used (my BT is a bit rusty though...) model this very well.
I don't know of a way to model it and keep it simple though.

>From alexj@juliet.ll.mit.edu Wed Aug 28 17:13:15 1991
>
>I think the snap really does have an effect- and thrust kicks are more 
>capable of moving someone, and throwing them back then doing damage.  
>According to my experience and little knowledge of the mechanics.  Snap
>kicks do more damage becaus eof the shockwave they impart on the body.  
>Thrust kicks are a little slower and spend mor etime pushing against the 
>opponent...

I agree.  But I'd keep damage the same for both, possibly favoring
thrust kicks.

>From glhodge@umassmed.UMMED.EDU Wed Aug 28 17:52:44 1991
>
>What I wanted to cover is the
>technique of rotating the body roughly 1/4 turn during an attack.  It is
>not as powerful as a spin, but many styles claim that it adds force to
>an attack.  [...]
>Many styles encourage students to swivel their hips and/or shoulders during
>an attack to add extra power.  This is what I was trying to model.  

I'd say more like an 8th of a turn, a 1/4 turn would extend range but would
not increase damage.

>it might not be worth modeling at all.

True.

>From glhodge@umassmed.UMMED.EDU Wed Aug 28 18:08:39 1991
>
>       Hey, did you guys get Phil's letter?  Phil, my header listed only
>me as a recipient.

No they didn't.  It was just little stuff, more aimed at TL so I only
sent it to you (Jeff).

>From glhodge@umassmed.UMMED.EDU Wed Aug 28 18:08:39 1991
>
>       What is a "half-fist?"  

Start with an open hand.  Fold in all four fingers at the joint in the middle
of the fingers.  Your palm should be visible (if you look at it :-) and
not scrunched up.  That's a half-fist.  Good for getting into tight places
like throat or solarplexis.

>Also, what are "inverted punches?"

Punches that land with the palm side up.

>Aside from that, a "double punch" sounds like a
>florentine punch-punch at specific areas.

But it is truly simultaneous, and it is taught as a single skill, hence I 
don't think there should be a penalty.  (Although a double punch uses both
hands, hence you are committed and have very little chance to block anything).

Phil

From uunet!juliet.ll.mit.edu!alexj Wed Aug 28 19:46:30 1991

NOTE: Al ot of this is just my opinion base don my experience.  I would
ask for input form MArk on some of the Fencing query and PHil and Jim on
the MA stuff- particularly on the kick question!

ON RECOVERY

Geoff;-) says:
>One of the things I based recovery times on was my brief experience
>with Shotokan and fencing. 

It is interesting to note that you use two styles that have as there 
primary powe roffensive attack as a lunge.  Every Shotokan punch is a
great blow, lunge punch compared to other martial art punches.  Recovery
from  these is unbelievably slow!  You have to recover from the great 
blow AND the lunge!  Fencing, while less committed is also a fairly high
committment art once an attack is truly launched.    I think this may
bias your feelings about recovery time(my opinion only!) .  

My personal experience with all sorts of attacks(including long sword in
SCA) is that it is considerably faster(I wouldn't have said 1/4 as Jim's
data seems to indicate but probably a half.)  


>Again, Alex, I have no hard data, but I wouldn't think that aiming
>at a target would slow the strike down that much.  Perhaps a "called shot"
>would (and does, sort of, by decreasing the % chance), but most attacks in
>both our systems are thrown against fairly general locations. 

In real life most shots are, IMO, called shots.  We just don't call them 
that.  People really don't just swing and randomly impact a part of a 
person's body.  What the random location chart and normal strikes try to
model is the way an opening occurs and the person aims and strikes for that
opening.  I thin kther eis alot of energy expended on controlling the angle 
and direction of the attack.  This is critical.  Beginning swords people 
often start hitting people with the flat of their blades in the first 
frenzies of combat!   I honestly don't know how much energy is expended 
in that though- just that some percentage is.

Jeff says:
> I find your other suggestion--that 
>putting energy behind the attack (so as to do damage) actually slows down
>the action--to be counter-intuitive.  I can't say you are wrong, but it makes
>sense to me that that would actually speed the strike up.  After all, F=MA.
>(Not bad for a liberal arts grad, huh?  :-)

Typical strikes don't end when they make contact with the body of the 
opponent- the attacker is still pushing the blad eand supporting it as it 
passes through the body.  A lot of the enrgy expenditure of a strike occurs
on impact.  I don't know how much though.  Jim, do you have any data about
how much energy is used once astrike hits compared to getting the strike 
there?  Maybe it is minimal- I am not sure.  My gut impression is that a lot
of the arms energy is used at and after that point- and recovering the blade 
isagainst no resistance and the balde/punch doesn't have to be as firm when it is couched..... just my opinion.  You are correct though, Jiff;-), F does 
equal MA.  And if it turns out that the velocity of the weapon just before 
impact imparts most of the damage then it would indicate that the recovery 
times would be closer(unless of course the muscle groups in the limbs are 
faster at contracting than expanding?  Any physiology expertise out there?)


>You say you don't think Uechi-ryu teaches "fight from press" skills,
>but instead just teaches you to fight at a comfortable range for your style.
>I guess it's all relative

I agree - it is all relative.  I make levels of press and retreat be based
on weapon length.  Uechi punches actually have a significantly shortewr weapon
length than a Shotokan punch!    I think that might be the key- and Jim I think 
Uechi does take skills in Fight in a Press.  Just MO.!

> A sidekick hits the opponent from
>the front, but a roundhouse hits him from the flank.  I don't know what a
>crescent is good for, they seem sort of useless to me.

DO you relly want to judge strikes on that scale of complexity?  If so there
a whole host of martial art strikes I could give you which are basically
hand strikes that allow for a different access angle or more convenient 
strike potential!  

>Finally, why do you say that a "snap" (rotating the hips or shoulders)
>has no effect on power?  Many styles seem to feel it does (although many
>others obviously don't). 

I think the snap really does have an effect- and thrust kicks are more 
capable of moving someone, and throwing them back then doing damage.  
According to my experience and little knowledge of the mechanics.  Snap
kicks do more damage becaus eof the shockwave they impart on the body.  
Thrust kicks are a little slower and spend mor etime pushing against the 
opponent...

Phil?  Jim?  COnfirmations?  Opinions?  


                        Alex 

From: uunet!umassmed.UMMED.EDU!glhodge (Geoffrey L. Hodge)

        Alex, I agree that people spend most of the time in what I would
call a "light retreat."  It does make some sense to make that the norm, but
there are also reasons not to.  I don't think that BT or TL have a press/
retreat system that is easy or attractive enough for people to use in a 
game as much as press/retreat is used in real life.  In a real combat, 
people may spend most of their time in a TL "light retreat" but they close
to make most of their attacks, then shift back to the light retreat.  I
chose to set the distance where most of the attacks occur as the norm.
I think they are just two different ways of doing the same thing.  Until
I have a better press/retreat system, I will just assume that PCs are more
brave and/or bloodthirsty than real people.  That usually seems to be true :-)

        On grapple & overbear (BT & TL):  I agree that some techniques 
use more strenght and weight (like tackle) and some use more finess (like
various aikido throws).  I am just not sure it is worth having two separate
"styles" of combat.  Let strength and weight be big mods for tackle, but
smaller mods for throws.  I'd just like to get rid of the duplicate skills.
The ones that bother me most (BT and TL) are the "hold," "throw," and
"release" skills.  In my brief experience with aikido, I was convinced that
a person who is not terribly strong or heavy, could, with much practice,
learn to toss someone Kyle's size around the room.  But I also found that
the larger and stronger aikidoka had big advantage, even though they were
doing aikido, which is not supposed to emphasize strength.  Nate and Kyle
are good examples.  My point is, that for holds, throws, and releases,
if skills are equal, I think the bigger, stronger person will have an
advantage.  If you buy this argument, then all holds, throws, and releases
could be covered by grapple skills (getting rid of overbear), but would
get a large positive modifier for strength and weight.  The effects of this
constant mod would diminish as combatants become more skilled.  I think
this models reality, but I don't have a firm enough grasp on reality to
be sure!  :-)

        Alex, thanks for the list of combat options I forgot.  Some I left
out on purpose because they are "generic" fighting skills rather than
unarmed combat skills.  Taliesin covers florentine, bash, parry, called
shot, "mystical" skills (somewhat), and toughness (in the form of Physical
Fatigue).  I had not thought of off-hand/foot, attack-while-moving, or
instant attack.  Off hand/foot is good, attack while moving might just be
an exceptionally easy combat acrobatics (I don't know).  What is instant
attack?  Is this the Shotokan response-without-taking-time-to-react that
you mentioned earlier?  Could this just be a preset: "If I am surprised or
confused I preset a quickstrike punch?"
        A hook kick, btw, is like a roundhouse in reverse.  The leg swings
backwards and strikes with the heel.  A slap is similar.
        I have done a fair amount of casual research to come up with this
list of skills, but I am afraid that there is some weird Tibetan style that
has ten thousand attacks that I have never heard of!  Oh well.

        I definately believe in related skills, general skills and support
skills.  I think it is amusing to watch how BT and Taliesin are developing.
I stole most of my combat options and several other good ideas from BT,
now BT is slowly developing a "tree structure" similar to Taliesin.  Level
factors are similar to fields, and general skills similar to areas.  I guess
we must be on the right track, huh?  Btw, this last week of discussion has
been infinately more valuable to me than a year of being subbed to g-mast.
You guys are an amazing resource.  I'll return the favor as best I can.
(You pat my back and I'll pat yours :-)

        I also agree with Alex that perception occurs all the time.  That's
what makes it such a bitch to model.  I also decided that the best way to
go was to have cumulative positive mods with time.  The longer something
occurs, the more likely you are to notice it.  The only problem I have is
modeling the continuous effect of dice luck.  For example, lets say that
"realistically" a person should get a combat perception roll every segment
(or count).  The person could roll brilliantly well on the very first seg
and know everything about the incoming attack.  Likewise, the person
(especially if it were Britt), could roll a string of 80s and 90s and 
never know what hit him.  More likely, the person will realize somewhere
in between what is going on.  The point at which you realize an attack
is coming is a very important thing in a fight.  One dice roll cannot
determine *when* you notice an attack--only *if* you notice it, and how
much you notice.  I don't know what to do about this though.

        Finally, Alex, I (obviously) like the idea of having Kata only
increase the speed of specifically sequential actions.

        Let's keep this discussion going.  At this rate, I'll have
Taliesin 3.0 out in another month :-)

                                                        -Jeff
From: uunet!umassmed.UMMED.EDU!glhodge (Geoffrey L. Hodge)

        Thanks, Phil, for defining your terms.  A half-fist is what I thought
it was.

        I agree with Phil and Alex that people generally always make called
shots.  As Alex pointed out, the random hit location can be assumed to be the
place where the best target opened up.  This is not strictly realistic, but
seems to be the best available model.

        Phil points out, correctly I believe, that most of a fight is spent
moving around and looking for openings (and also, I think, regaing fatigue).
I don't know if there is any way to really model this.  I'd like to, but I
can't think of a good way.  The idea of just attacking as quickly as you
can is the best strategy in most game systems, but isn't very realistic.
I have toyed with the idea of giving large bonuses for taking the time to
make combat perceptions to increase the chance to hit, but the only systems
I could come up with would have unbalanced the TL combat system.

                                                        -Jeff

