Contract Declined

Scene: Conservancy Brasalia on Terra
A private residence in New Janeiro.

He forcibly brought himself to a semblace of ease 
while waiting for his guest. A large man with the 
stocky build and calloused hands of a roughneck, the 
quality of his clothes and surroundings did not 
match his appearance. With a glass of red wine in 
hand he swiveled his chair to look out on to the palazzo.
His daughter called it the Garden of Stone and it was all of that, 
the pillars and sculptures growing from a tiled foundation so old 
even the most durable of the colors had begun to fade. 

He turned but did not rise when his visitor was announced, waiting 
instead until his guest had poured himself some brandy and taken the 
seat opposite his. With a quick look at the setting sun and shadowed 
garden he nodded his head to his guest.

"Liam, it is good to see you again"

"Even when you don't know why I am here ?"

"Come now, of course I know why you are here. My request 
has gone up the chain and back down and the powers that be 
have placed it into your capable hands to deal with. From 
that I would guess that my request was declined." 

"I have carried back much more than a simple yes or no."

"Am I correct that your Family will not do it ?"

"Yes my friend, you are correct."

"Then I see little more that need be said. There are other Families."

"They will also decline."

"So the fix is in. Have I offended the Families ? 
I thought that we have done business long enough 
for some courtesies to be exchanged before I would 
be frozen out."

"Dominic please. You are not being shunned, the specific contract 
itself is the only thing being rejected, the reason I am here 
is because you are a friend of the Family and I will explain if you 
let me get a word in edgewise."

Dominic sat back and returned a lopsided grin. 

"Sorry Liam, just the habits of a lifetime."

Liam snorted but did not comment.

"Do you wish to know why the contract will not be pursued ?"

"Of course I do."

"I have been sent to make clear the whole of it to you. 
You are a friend and the Fathers want you to know 
what you face if you continue on this path. "

"Have you wondered why no MI have ever been 
terminated by us ?"

"Of course not. They have only been around a 
few years."

"Well. We did hit an MI. Once. Just after the big war."

"You hid it well. I have never heard about it."

"We didn't hide it. The MI did. The man was listed as KIA and
that was all we heard for several months. We congratulated ourselves 
on a job well done and forgot about it." 

"It was a great time. Business was good. The Code came back. Every 
punk kid we brought in knew it before they went anywhere with us. 
We don't hit our own. We don't talk. The family sees nothing. Just 
the basics, but important. "

"At the time there was a kid, he had real promise. 
He had style and honor in the old way. At 16 he was 
already a Paladin. I haven't seen anyone faster, though 
they say that the new Chinee may be."

"That summer an ice house in Mexico City was hit. 
You may remember the incident, it was on July 4th."

"But that took out an entire block !"

"All of it Family owned. The cost for us in people was 
astronomical. The real kick is that the MI did it 
and we can't do a thing. We have it all on disc, the 
bastardo did nothing to hide. He came in, dropped all 
six men that were there and laid down demos. He dragged 
the only one he had left alive outside, left a message 
on him and left."

"The kid was still clutching the message chip when we 
dug him out of the rubble a day later. He spent months 
recovering. Once he did he disappeared. The MI who did it 
doesn't appear to exist in any of their databases. We know 
his face, we know he has a French accent but we can't find him."

"Yes, but what of the message ? What was it ?"

"The cost will always be too high."

"Thats it ?"

"What more is needed ? We are a business. There is no profit in a war. 
They can field people against us that no-one knows exist. After a few 
months of looking the Fathers ruled the MI off-limits. But even if they 
didn't this contract would still be declined."

Dominic looked up warily.

"Why ?"

"An MI has no past. They do seem to mean it. 
When we finally found the kid, he had already
joined. Dom, the target is that damn kid. We don't 
hit our own."

"So thats it ?" 

"For us. There are others. But Dominic, please 
think carefully. You are a friend and we take 
care of our friends. One square block, Six 
good men, none of them cherry. Two of them 
were Paladins. He wasn't marked. We don't 
have so many friends that we can afford 
to lose some."

"I should sit back and watch him walk away."

"The MI are not good insurance risks."

"Let nature take its course ?"

"There is a war on."

With a grimace. 

"Any other suggestions ?"

"Come to dinner. Alyssa is serving Seviche."
