"The Order"

Scene: City of New Scotia on Terra
Middle Level Cost Business Quarters 


The older man droppped the hardcopy file on his desk and turned to face 
the office door as it opened. His monitor screen blanked automatically as 
the report's author stepped in. 

"Come in Toscane."

He tapped the report with a finger.

"Toscane, how long have you worked for the order ?"

"Twenty three years sir."

Tap.

"And during those years neither I or my predecessor have never felt that you 
have given us anything less than you very best."

Tap.

"Would you care to explain to me why I now have a document on my desk 
with less detail in it than a Neo-Luddite's Physics text ?"

"Sir. I presume you are speaking of the Roundtable document."

Tap.

"Correct."

"There is no lack in those who compiled that report. They were all proven operatives 
and sources. The lack is in availability of the details themselves. That we know anything at all 
is due to the purest luck. We already have someone working on something unrelated on the real 
Excalibur. His report came in from Point 1 just a day before the false Excalibur lifted."

Tap.

"Yet despite this lucky break all you have been able to find is this collection of scraps? At least three Councilors 
missing, presumed to be on the Excalibur. No Captain listed for the ship's flight registry, but the Executive Officer 
is the most decorated combat commander of his Academy generation. The most controversial and dangerous MI Field 
Commander we have is not known to be on the ship but appears to have dissapeared along with two recently acquired 
but unidentified children. No known CSS Frigate is missing yet the Excalibur appears to have been a 
Frigate of unknown class. Beltane, who we have watched for 6 years now without real success, 
may be on the ship as well. Oh yes, and someone on this ship stole 12 cases of single 
malt whiskey just before lift."

Tap 

"Does this sound plausible to you, Toscane ?"

"No sir."

The finger stilled. 

"But ?"

"There is a great deal of negative evidence in there as well. We know that they did not head out via the 
heavily traveled dispatch routes. They took no from CTS systems in the week before lift. The ship 
was not purchased in the last 12 months. Few, if any, of the personnel appear to have known of the 
trip more than 5 weeks before the ship lifted. There is evidence that very few in the Senate had any 
knowledge to share. None of our corporate sources had any hint. Given time I think the combination 
of positive and negative detail will flesh out the bare bones."

The hand spread out across the folder.

"I believe you are right. Very well. You have unlimited access to resources including 
diverting our current craft and opereations. As of this moment this is your only task. 
Assume that the MI and Councilors are going to the same place for the 
same reason. Identify the source of the ship and its capabilities. Get me a complete roster. 
Get the destination. Identify those damn children. In my eye, collaboration between the MI and 
Confed Councilors creates a big hammer. I want to know what nail Sutaken is aiming at."

The young man turned and paused at a noise.

"And Toscane."

"Sir ?"

"Thank you."
