"Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? "

Scene: An open field on the planet Coven.
The sun is setting.

The shuttle settles and cuts engines with a shocking cessation of noise.
The ramp touches ground no sooner than the shuttle's passenger. As she
starts to trot even the creaking sounds of cooling engines drop away.

With each quickening step the sounds she leaves behind are replaced with
simple chanting.

Her hair sails back behind her, a black wave filled with beads, braids
and a single silver comb.

"We stand outside time and space,"

Legs pumping faster. Her only contribution to the chant her footsteps,
her breathing, and the swish of her skintights.

" in a place not of earth."

Loosening up now. Shipboard control giving way to 
to the freedom of long strides.

"As our ancestors bade us,"

The setting sun threads its way through the trees. The reflections dance
off her faudenim jacket making it seem as though the sun is running with
her.

" we join together and are one with the light."

She can see the flicker of a fire in the woods. Eyes focus ahead and a
determined, triumphant grin lights her face.

"Regard the ancient ways."

A single touch at the edge of the clearing.

"We shall not walk this path again."

With a almost audible snap the glade seals behind her. She sails
over the bonfire. Arms wide and behind. Jacket flapping. Coming to
ground in a half kneel.

She rises to her feet and settles her jacket with a flick of 
her shoulders. She pauses, disciplining her face into a semblance 
of dignity. She turns to face the rest of the circle. 

Across from her are the three Sylvans. Two men and a women. A brief
"Yum" feeling walks through her middle. Not skyclad but close.
Loincloths, muscle, coup sticks and not much else. One man had his hair 
in a Mohawk roach. The otehrs had their hair pulled back in
unadorned pony tails. Their sun darkened skin reflected their lifestyle
more than their genetics. All of them looked to be anglo in genotype.
They each gave a brief nod. Yup, that was the Sylvan for you. Why waste
a perfectly good word when a nod will do.

To the left of them stand the three .. crones ? She didn'r recognize
their tradition and no better word came to mind. Dressed in black and
cream cottons with a cut the puritans would have approved of. Hair
hidden under square caps. Their perpetual disapproval seemed to have
washed the character and age from their faces giving them a strict
sameness. Though young she thought that Shakespeare would have cast them
in MacBeth with no hesitation. All three ventured tight lipped nods.

To the right of the Sylvan were the Kavenists. Again, two men and a
woman. Well, but conservatively, dressed in slacks and jackets. Only the
woman was wearing her mirrorshades, the two men had them tucked in their
pockets. The men both had shoulder length black hair but the woman's was
a coppery mass of curls going to her knees. The men appeared to be
standard Terran mixes but she had the green eyed and freckled
stamp of Ireland you still saw sometimes. One of the men caught her
eye and clapped silently to her.

Next to them, and to her right, was the tallest man she had ever seen.
Two meters plus. Dressed in a silver and black cloak and white
skintights. The black of his skin only added to the color confusion. The
only thing that might indicate a tradition was the dragon scar on his
forearm. He gave no sign that he had even noticed her. 

To her left was a small asian gentlemen on a foldable camp stool. His
red silk pants and jacket were embroidered with gold cranes. His hands
surrounded a cup of tea which he raised to her. The twinkle in his eye
was almost embarrassing as his eyes walked along her body. Behind him 
was a plain woman in the same outfit with with a vaxcoder held near 
her face.

The tallest crone stepped forward and held her hands out. For silence ?
In this crowd ? 

"The 102nd circle is gathered. Now that we are all here we can discuss 
what is to be done in the world 
at large. The arrival of the Kayla Tyro-Vanti suggests a reordering of
the agenda. Ms. Tyro-Vanti, would you care to explain how your two
nieces ended up as wards of a lesbian psychopath ?"

Hmm. Humorless AND bigoted. Maybe Cotton Mather was merely acting in
self defense.

"As opposed to a heterosexual psychopath ? Or would you care instead to
have an description of how my nieces and all the other survivors are
doing ? I will assume the latter since I won't give the former."

"There were 340 survivors from the colony. Most of those were known 
high psis. Most have scattered to family and familiar traditions. Of the 
few that did not, two were my nieces, Alisa and Alyssandra. By choice 
they selected to go with the MI that had interviewed them. The reasons 
were not clear until another survivor, my cousin Jorge, showed up to 
tell me what had happened."

"Jorge claims that the Yssdaak are psi-hunters. Most of the known psis 
appeared to have hidden from them in various disciplined manners. We have 
no clue why some of the low ballers made it."

She scanned the faces looking for some reaction. 

"The level of psi or training doesn't seem to directly correlate to 
safety. My sister and her rake of a husband were well trained and high psi 
and didn't make it but some of my other relatives like Jorge did. And Jorge 
can just barely light a candle. The girls are the highest in my family and 
gifted but Lisa was just beginning her serious training."

She could feel the outraged reaction from the crones. Tall crone 
immediately burst out.

"All the more reason that they have a guardian who is gifted, not a
normal. I thought that even a Roman would have more sense than to leave
a healthy child in the hands of a Normal. An Elysian Mind-Blind
Blood-Hand."

A small giggle escaped her, she just couldn't help it. It only seemed to
enrage the crones more. It was time to head this off.

"I have met the Field Commander and I can assure you that she is
anything but a normal. And if you believe them,  " She gestured toward 
the Kavenists with her thumb "then in 20 generations that will be a 
moot point as well. She is Elysian, which seems to be the main point
of your objection. Mind-Blind ? Perhaps. I don't really know. Blood-Hand
? Definitely. But the the circle made its decision about that years ago."

"You seem to want me to condemn this Karban. My nieces appear 
happy and challenged. More importantly, 'Lyssandra foresaw this. Foresaw 
that she would need this woman and that the Blood-Hand would need her. You
may choose to ignore that kind of gift from your goddess if you wish but 
we rarely try and dodge the fates. Look to your tradition:
An shall it harm none, so shall Ye. "

The Sylvan woman nodded. Where they keeping some kind of quiet score 
and she had just made first point ? Couldn't they just wear black and white 
striped loincloths so the roles were clear ? Maybe she shouldn't have gone 
without dinner, she was feeling lightheaded.

Tall crone leaned forward. 

"But the Elysians abandoned their souls. And they imperil any they 
contact. To leave a child in the care of one of them is grotesque.
With no teachers other than the Blood-Hand they are doomed."

Mohawk Sylvan stepped forward. 

"One of the MI is our brother. His name is Moon-Mist. He is a hunter and
a teacher."

By the Dancer ! This was getting interesting. She stilled and nurtured a
seed of the picture that was forming. 

The red-head coughed. All heads turned to her.

"One of the MI is one of Daryl's Own."

Tall crone shuddered. One crone gasped and the other just spat in 
contempt into the fire. 

"Abomination!"

Crane Man raised his tea cup. Damn. Did he ever drink from that or 
was it a prop ? She tried to remember if she had seen him sip it.

"The ship carries Proximans and an Alphan Manipulator. As well as
a Flawed One."

Tall crone was starting to turn red. 

Black Dragon held out his hand. 

"I am Kalim Sar'Yoshi. Two of my people travel with them and they 
are not the least of us."

OK. But who are his people ? She needed a scorecard. Maybe she could ask
Mohawk boy for a copy of his.

Tall crone choked out the last tidbit. 

"And the inauspiciously named Dr. Beltane is with them."

She started to dance a little. She just couldn't help it. Maybe she
could get Mohawk boy to join her in a wardance. Looking up she thought a
raindance may be more apropriate. She paused and looked at her audience.
Stern looks from the crones just slid of her.

"Do you realize what the Confederation has done ? We sent a ship filled
with the least stable, most powerful personalities on an unknown mission
in an unknown direction. We have declared war on the rest of the galaxy
! I didn't know that the Confed had a sense of humor."

Another skip and a jump. 

"And you were worried about the girls getting training. Not only will they 
learn. They will learn from the very best teacher ; experience herself"

"I would suggest that we take a break and come back when we have had 
a chance to digest this and get something to eat."

With that she headed for the edge of the circle and tapped on the edge.
A sound like glass breaking was heard as she turned toward the Sylvan.
Consternation came to rest in the crones' faces.

"Hey Mohawk boy. Why don't you come with me and explain more about 
this Moon-Mist ? "

With a shrug to his companions he walked to join her. Picking up his 
sidepack of clothes from the edge of the circle. She linked her arm in 
his and looked back.

"We have a great deal of important problems to deal with. And I have 
more information about the Watchers."

They vanished from view in the rapidly breaking rain.
