The nativeborn have some sort of mysterious form of craft magic that does something cool

How do we deal with the earthlings

Are there any earthlings or Demon s involved with this

have the amount of venture the high key but the amount of prophecy be low key

The guru have crystals in their hair, dreadlocks and very large and sharp weapons
the guru where simple doublets of asbestos turned into cloth
and they refer to the cloth as ash white even though it is many colored
they use 5 pound hammers as a weapon of choice and they will often use these as Florentine weapons
they love to hammer things into shape
they have disciplines that allow them to suppress the damage they've taken their like conscious berserkers
the guru earmark is everything is smooth clean if it's square sharply square, if it's a curve it's a mathematically clean curve

Note that the nativeborn lived deceptively simple lives. They are relatively disease-free and live fairly long, in great part because of their craft and other small magics
it's

Figure out the typical rates of speed of horses in carts and lay lines

Merovan combat is designed around elite troops simply because only a small number of elite troops can make it through lay lines. Question: should I allow horses through lay lines?

How do the guru interact with other dwarves

In general the nativeborn where silver jewelry while the merovans where gold jewelry

The preferred drink of the nativeborn is hard cider

Merovans prefer wine especially from the southern vineyards like Nantucket and Providence

needs and other fruit wines as well as other fruit ciders are drunk by both

The guru have the skill of affinity, anything that is theirs they can summon to them and it will come

Describe the architecture and the demands of the various cultures

Put together the populations of the various dukedom's and the various families

for the Fort Maine demense tends to fight tediously offenses tactically defenses. their tactics fit their motto "here I stand"

The family motto itself " we die here", It is a shortening of the full motto "we die here that others don't have to"

We die here that other shall not
that is also the motto of the family guard

Each of the Fort Maine have two nativeborn who act as both their valets/shield man/factotum or voice
as they head into battle the nativeborn troops run alongside the Fort Maine. They can out run horses over the long term
because they use craft magic as part of their running. And they where Shields on their back

When the current Lord of the Fort Maine goes out he will do so will taking out a demon or something other similarly heroic

Carlson Wise women and wise men have the same silvery eyes and bleached hair. Usually they use some sort of focus for their soothsaying.

Who are the allies of the Merlin Kings family? Certainly the Fort Maine are but are they actually closely allied or they distantly allied?

They Fort Maine DeMent's demesne resides on a mild plateau

remember that there are three large fields below associated with the Fort Maine complex

The Fort means do not depend on walls they consider their people to be there walls

in the Fort maintenance they refer to someone who died as having passed unless
they died protecting another or serving a purpose in which case they simply say
"he died"


There is something magical about the way that the Fort Maine bring forth more and more ontological strength as they get older. They become more of a weapon
the Fort Maine have few allies but those allies they have are rocksolid

Fort Maine have a substantial military presence in fact you can say that they
are an armed demesne. Every single peasant is armed. Every nativeborn, every
Merovan, etc. in fact the so-called arming field or target practice field is a
standard component of every village. And the Fort means require one day of
practice each week. The women generally work with crossbow and staff while the men work with
staff and spear.

The nativeborn views stone as part of their masonry. They are effectively stone talkers or stone whisperers.

The nativeborn midwives include a practice of naming the child in order to protect them
the Hera: have a blind spot when it comes to the nativeborn they seem to keep forgetting what the nativeborn are capable of.

The great road was built by organs, it is fused stone with viaducts and aqueducts and waystation areas. It is freaking and impressive

It is built with the separation so that people cannot necessarily go from section to section or leap from one side to the other

Each demesne works to keep the great road clear of snow and ice. A lot of that snow and ice melts with the sun each day and then drains through the nice fused drains.

Write up the various craft guilds

do up a hidden list of the special crafts of the nativeborn
so traveling through the lay lines is like traveling through the mists at high speed where shadows and squirrels come and go and disappear

despite all that the marches do, the mega-flora and mega fauna do get through it times

sinister Maine uses a main gauche in the left-hand (the main gauche appearing to be almost indestructible) and a long sword in the right
right Maine wields a staff is a start I left the and hand axes

note that the judges and the Barrowman's law corresponds to that of the nativeborn
how is it that the duchies are able to maintain a cohesive relationship to the King
where are the order houses of Alex's characters order?

Remember that the demons own a great deal of what is not already owned by the duchies

the nativeborn have a capability that very few people know about, they can go through the lay lines as a unit

While the Fort Maine walls are not much more than 8 feet high, they do have a central walkway protected by an outer wall and this allows people to move along the wall and reinforce wall very quickly

dwarves and guru cannot use the lay lines, can be Hera:?

Are there alchemists as well as healers?

So the nativeborn fields have stone walls around them. The nativeborn houses tend to be embedded into the earth and themselves tend to have stone walls around them and sometimes
stonewalls embedded in them even between rooms. Nativeborn houses tend to have large sunken fireplaces in the center with polished wooden or stone benches around them embedded into the ground

lay lines are almost completely excluded from the roads except at the node's such as the city

we know that the wildlands contain many make a for a and many fauna as well as many smaller smaller creatures

The nativeborn have always use the simplest material possible that when combined with craft Magic will produce the best results

the demons in the her specialize in acquiring things and land in space and power

the demon children are not driven to kill those who have failed them only repeated failures will call somebody to be recycled

source's are there ghosts or spirits

Do up a written rubric each a story

The great wailing spirit is equivalent to coyote

Have a story of the rubric each all of the calling of the clans over a child born to the wailing. 

Since the world of time is the nexus space it is the focal point of an epic tide and the focus of many conflicts is the fulcrum space

have a story about the naming ceremony for the shape changers that includes the discussions of foster children in fostering children and taking on the totem name versus their birth parents

So the rubric each of have the concept of a totem son, a body son, and a true son

What breaks up the boredom of the wildlands

"are you sure you're my nephew, it must be your father's line that produces such any questions. You pay any attention to those expensive tutors that you were given? 

My girl, I do not understand your husband's disappointment. Does the chief not realize that a wailing born to the clan will only increase our stature.
He is concerned that the fact that he does not have a true son will have a cost is a blessing for all of us. All true clan chiefs have true sons.
He this child will not be as strong as a cat or as powerful as a bear or is farsighted as our hawk. He has something far for scarier for our enemies. Remember it was where Lang that came to us and freed us from the Dorgan.

Add in totem poles the camps







