
Super-Sized Rocky Planet Found By Irene Klotz, Discovery News

type size: [A] [A] [A]

March 14, 2006— A team of astronomers has discovered a large, ice-rock planet 
that dominates a distant solar system, much like Jupiter reigns in our bit of 
Milky Way real estate.

Taking into account other discoveries of extrasolar planets, the finding of an 
Earth-class planet leads scientists to theorize that the type of planetary 
system that develops around a star depends on the size of the star.

"Our discovery suggests that different types of solar systems form around 
different types of stars," said astronomer Scott Gaudi, with the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.

Stars like our sun form systems with Jupiter-class planets, while smaller red 
dwarf stars, which are common in the Milky Way galaxy, can support a system 
dominated only by a large Earth-class world.

Super-sized stars, in contrast, may include a planet so big that it almost 
becomes a star itself, a so- called brown dwarf.

The new object, which contains of the mass of about 13 Earth-sized planets, was 
found orbiting a red dwarf star located about 9,000 light-years away.

Scientists suspect it contains a mix of rock and ice, but no liquid water. The 
planet orbits its parent star at roughly the distance of our solar system's 
asteroid belt, a location where temperatures would be about -330° Fahrenheit.

Astronomers believe the star system ran out of material to expand the planet to 
Jupiter proportions.

"This is a solar system that ran out of gas," said Gaudi.

It may not be alone. Since most of the Milky Way's main stars are smaller than 
the sun, solar systems dominated by large Earths may be much more common than 
those containing gas giants, the researchers conclude in a paper submitted to 
the Astrophysical Journal Letters.

The authors reason that since material orbiting a low-mass star accumulates into 
planets gradually, there is more time for the gas in the protoplanetary disk to 
dissipate before the larger-mass, Jupiter-sized giants can form.

Smaller stars also tend to have smaller gas disks, leaving fewer raw materials 
for planet formation.

The new planet was discovered as part of an ongoing survey that uses light from 
foreground stars in the Milky Way galaxy to magnify the light of more distant 
stars, a phenomenon known as microlensing.

If the foreground star has a planet in its clutch, the light from the background 
star is further distorted, though it can only be detected from Earth during 
brief periods when the stars' alignment is favorable.

"Microlensing is the only way to detect Earth-mass planets from the ground with 
current technology," said Gaudi. "If there had been an Earth-mass planet in the 
same region as this super-Earth, and if the alignment had been just right, we 
could have detected it."
