Animal-Human Hybrids Spark Controversy Maryann Mott National Geographic News

January 25, 2005

Scientists have begun blurring the line between human and animal by producing 
chimeras—a hybrid creature that's part human, part animal. 

Chinese scientists at the Shanghai Second Medical University in 2003 
successfully fused human cells with rabbit eggs. The embryos were reportedly the 
first human-animal chimeras successfully created. They were allowed to develop 
for several days in a laboratory dish before the scientists destroyed the 
embryos to harvest their stem cells. 

In Minnesota last year researchers at the Mayo Clinic created pigs with human 
blood flowing through their bodies. 

And at Stanford University in California an experiment might be done later this 
year to create mice with human brains. 

Scientists feel that, the more humanlike the animal, the better research model 
it makes for testing drugs or possibly growing "spare parts," such as livers, to 
transplant into humans. 

Watching how human cells mature and interact in a living creature may also lead 
to the discoveries of new medical treatments. 

But creating human-animal chimeras—named after a monster in Greek mythology that 
had a lion's head, goat's body, and serpent's tail—has raised troubling 
questions: What new subhuman combination should be produced and for what 
purpose? At what point would it be considered human? And what rights, if any, 
should it have? 

There are currently no U.S. federal laws that address these issues. 

Ethical Guidelines 

The National Academy of Sciences, which advises the U.S. government, has been 
studying the issue. In March it plans to present voluntary ethical guidelines 
for researchers. 

A chimera is a mixture of two or more species in one body. Not all are 
considered troubling, though. 

For example, faulty human heart valves are routinely replaced with ones taken 
from cows and pigs. The surgery—which makes the recipient a human-animal 
chimera—is widely accepted. And for years scientists have added human genes to 
bacteria and farm animals. 

What's caused the uproar is the mixing of human stem cells with embryonic 
animals to create new species. 

Biotechnology activist Jeremy Rifkin is opposed to crossing species boundaries, 
because he believes animals have the right to exist without being tampered with 
or crossed with another species. 

He concedes that these studies would lead to some medical breakthroughs. Still, 
they should not be done. 

"There are other ways to advance medicine and human health besides going out 
into the strange, brave new world of chimeric animals," Rifkin said, adding that 
sophisticated computer models can substitute for experimentation on live 
animals. 

"One doesn't have to be religious or into animal rights to think this doesn't 
make sense," he continued. "It's the scientists who want to do this. They've now 
gone over the edge into the pathological domain." 

David Magnus, director of the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics at Stanford 
University, believes the real worry is whether or not chimeras will be put to 
uses that are problematic, risky, or dangerous. 

Human Born to Mice Parents? 

For example, an experiment that would raise concerns, he said, is genetically 
engineering mice to produce human sperm and eggs, then doing in vitro 
fertilization to produce a child whose parents are a pair of mice. 

"Most people would find that problematic," Magnus said, "but those uses are 
bizarre and not, to the best of my knowledge, anything that anybody is remotely 
contemplating. Most uses of chimeras are actually much more relevant to 
practical concerns." 

Last year Canada passed the Assisted Human Reproduction Act, which bans 
chimeras. Specifically, it prohibits transferring a nonhuman cell into a human 
embryo and putting human cells into a nonhuman embryo. 

Cynthia Cohen is a member of Canada's Stem Cell Oversight Committee, which 
oversees research protocols to ensure they are in accordance with the new 
guidelines. 

She believes a ban should also be put into place in the U.S. 

Creating chimeras, she said, by mixing human and animal gametes (sperms and 
eggs) or transferring reproductive cells, diminishes human dignity. 

"It would deny that there is something distinctive and valuable about human 
beings that ought to be honored and protected," said Cohen, who is also the 
senior research fellow at Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics in 
Washington, D.C. 

But, she noted, the wording on such a ban needs to be developed carefully. It 
shouldn't outlaw ethical and legitimate experiments—such as transferring a 
limited number of adult human stem cells into animal embryos in order to learn 
how they proliferate and grow during the prenatal period. 

Irv Weissman, director of Stanford University's Institute of Cancer/Stem Cell 
Biology and Medicine in California, is against a ban in the United States. 

"Anybody who puts their own moral guidance in the way of this biomedical 
science, where they want to impose their will—not just be part of an argument—if 
that leads to a ban or moratorium. … they are stopping research that would save 
human lives," he said. 

Mice With Human Brains 

Weissman has already created mice with brains that are about one percent human. 

Later this year he may conduct another experiment where the mice have 100 
percent human brains. This would be done, he said, by injecting human neurons 
into the brains of embryonic mice. 

Before being born, the mice would be killed and dissected to see if the 
architecture of a human brain had formed. If it did, he'd look for traces of 
human cognitive behavior. 

Weissman said he's not a mad scientist trying to create a human in an animal 
body. He hopes the experiment leads to a better understanding of how the brain 
works, which would be useful in treating diseases like Alzheimer's or 
Parkinson's disease. 

The test has not yet begun. Weissman is waiting to read the National Academy's 
report, due out in March. 

William Cheshire, associate professor of neurology at the Mayo Clinic's 
Jacksonville, Florida, branch, feels that combining human and animal neurons is 
problematic. 

"This is unexplored biologic territory," he said. "Whatever moral threshold of 
human neural development we might choose to set as the limit for such an 
experiment, there would be a considerable risk of exceeding that limit before it 
could be recognized." 

Cheshire supports research that combines human and animal cells to study 
cellular function. As an undergraduate he participated in research that fused 
human and mouse cells. 

But where he draws the ethical line is on research that would destroy a human 
embryo to obtain cells, or research that would create an organism that is partly 
human and partly animal. 

"We must be cautious not to violate the integrity of humanity or of animal life 
over which we have a stewardship responsibility," said Cheshire, a member of 
Christian Medical and Dental Associations. "Research projects that create human-
animal chimeras risk disturbing fragile ecosystems, endanger health, and affront 
species integrity."