ankind By Richard Macey October 13, 2005 Page Tools

    * Email to a friend * Printer format * *

Fleas use it to perform leaps that would make Olympic high jumpers green with 
envy. Bees use it to flap their wings without tiring.

Now Australian scientists have achieved a world first by copying resilin, the 
"rubber" insects employ to accomplish such athletic feats.

Future versions of the material could be used to make resilient

spare parts, including spinal discs and artificial arteries.

Chris Elvin, from CSIRO Livestock Industries in Brisbane, spent four years 
reproducing nature's "near perfect rubber". Dr Elvin said yesterday: "Nature had 
a couple of hundred million years of evolution do it. All insects have it. It 
gives them almost frictionless movement.

"Fleas have a pad of it in their legs. They squeeze and compress it, storing 
energy in it." When they want to jump "they release all that energy in a 
millisecond".

If humans had such pads they could leap 100-storey buildings.

Dragonflies and bees use resilin to beat their wings all day long. 

"Bees can flap their wings 720,000 times an hour," he said. "In their lifetimes 
they must flap their wings 500 million times." The scientists initially cloned 
the fruit fly gene that naturally produces the material. It was then put into 
bacteria, creating a biological "factory" to reproduce it as a liquid. The 
liquid was then cured under projector bulbs to form a workable solid. "We 
currently make sufficient material for research purposes, but this could be 
scaled up for commercial use," Dr Elvin said. "It looks a bit spaghetti [but] we 
can cast it in any shape."

Dr Elvin predicted the substance would lead to everything from artificial 
arteries to spinal parts that would not wear out despite being flexed 100 
million times.

"That's how many times you move your back in 50 or 60 years," he said. It could 
also be used in micro electronics. "We even imagine putting it in running 
shoes."

However, Dr Elvin, whose work has been published in Nature, said making 
artificial human parts was at least a decade away.

The team he stitched together to study resilin includes three other CSIRO 
divisions - Textiles and Fibre Technology, Molecular and Health Technologies and 
Manufacturing and Infrastructure Technologies, along with Queensland University, 
the Australian National University, Monash University and the University of 
South Australia. They are seeking commercial partners to develop the material. 
"Some of the markets we are looking at are worth hundreds of millions of dollars 
a year."