WHEN INVE?TING NEW CREATURES, THE G?! SHOULD ???????. VARIATIONS FROM EARTH-
NORM?L CR??TURES.   Some discretion must, of course, be used.  A flying
hippopotamus is most unlikely, unless strong magic is involved.  On the other
hand, a giant herbivorous snake is quite possible.  While Earth has no plant-
eating snakes,  there are many large lizards that subsist partially or entirely
on plants.  There seems to be no good reason why a snake could not evolve to ea
fruit - but such a beast would be unexpected by the players and therefore add
play value.   If a party thinks that they're killing dangerous beasts, when
in reality they're destroying the King'? scaly ''cattle,'' they will have
some explanations to make? Similarly, a mammalian creature might be equipped
with poisonous fangs (or disease-bearing saliva) ,

At all times,  the GM must remember that he must be able to justify, in some
way, every beast that he creates. If it does not fit into a specific ecological
niche,  the C?? must be able to explain what s?rt of peculiar intervention
has allowed the creature to appear and survive.  A grass-eating snake is simply
a large herbivore, but a three-headed dr?gon t?at eats gemstones is a joke -
and probably a ver.: hu?gry one - ex?l?nable only in terms of powerful and
rat??r silly ??gic.

THE GM MU?T DEVELOP A DESCRIPTION OF EACH NEW CREATURE'S PERSONAIITY AND
HABITS.  The creature's behavior and rea?tions will be determined by its
niche and will not necessarily have any obvious relationship to its appearance.
Therefore, players may often have to observe an animal to find out what it is
really like. For instance, the Eusmilus looks like a pet cat but has a tiger'
s instincts. The hypothetical herbivorous pyth6n, on the other hand, might look
fierce - but would probably hide from a strange human. A giant ground sloth has
tremendous claws for stripping foliage from trees; whether it 

A SPECIFIC ''REACTION MODIFIER'' SHOULD BE GIVEN FOR EACH CREATURE,  TO BE USED
IN DETERMINING ITS REACTION TO AN ENCOUNTER AS PER SECTION 64. This reaction
modifier'?ill have two parts:  a positive or negative number, and a word.
For inst?nce,  the modifier for thc Eusmilus might be ''-2??;  fight.' T!?is
means that 20 is subtracted from any roll on the Reaction Table (64) ,  and
that any bad reaction will be hostile.

The reaction modifier for the snakes might be ''+10%;  flee.'' Since they are
tame, they are likely to respond well to men; if frightened or attacked,
they will try to escape.

A creature may have more than one reaction modifiers listed. The modi?ier for a
bear might ordinarily be ''O;  flee. ' For a mother bear with cubs it would
be ''-40%;  fight.''

In general,  the results from the Reaction Table must be ?:odified according to
the habits and the intelligence of a creature, as well as the nature of the
party. Reactions of ''Pleasant'' and above are not to be expected from a wild
animal under any circumstances, unless perhaps a very high-ranking Beast Master
is in the party.  A wild stag that react? with a roll of 01 (''enraged'')
will not attack;  it will flee.  The ?eaction ?able result should be taken as a
guide to the general tone of the creature's response to the human intrusion.
The exact nature of its response must be governed by the CM's knowledge of
its personality.

The G? should also allow some modification on the Reaction T?ble,  dcpcnding on
thc party's actions. An offer of food, aid, or money (depending on the
creature) will give a positive modifier;  threats will give a negative modifier.

When the GM is dealing with creatures drawn from real life, he? will know
whether they are herd or pack animals. If creatures are being inv?n?ed, this is
just another thing their creator must determine. As a rule, very large
creatures tend to go alone, while smaller ones travel in groups. But there
are exceptions;  elephants and blue whales move in herds, and wolverines are
loners.

Any pack or herd will have some sort of social structure. The det?ils will
not be i:mportant in a game. However,  the leader of any group of animals
will be a be?st with an unu?ually high strength,  ?ndnr??ce, and/or pcrception.
The larger the group of animals,  the more formidable its leader (and
possibly the leader's m?te) will be.

THE WEAPON(S) A?D ATTACK ABILI?? OF EACH CREATURE MUST BE DEFINED. ?ost
creatures will have only naturaI weapons: teeth, claws, hooves, etc. For each
natural weapon, ??tablish Base Chance to hit ?nd the amount of damage done. For
some creatures,  a Rank?-of from 1 to 3 (1 to 4 for very intellig?nt creatnres)
may be possible with natural weapons.

The higher a creature's agility,  the greater its Base Chance to hit should be.
The larger the weapon and the stronger the creature,  the more damage should be
done. Refer to the creatures described in Section 65 for examples.

If a creature has more than one possible attacks (i.e. , teeth and hooves) it
should be stated whether more than one attacks are possible in the same
Pulse, and,  if so, whether there is an additional cost in Action Points.

If the creature is a tool-user,  the GM may wish to list the sort of weapons
which it favors.   Special weapons may     . be developed, or the weapons
from the Combat Table may be used.

If a creature has ? poisonous bite or sting,  it ??ill be ?ble to do d?mage out
of proportion to thc injury actually done by the teeth or stinger. This may
be handled in several ways. The simplest is to allow the creature an attack
as though it were much larger. A more authentic system is given in Section 65 -
see the descriptions of the Black Widow Spider an? Asp for two slightly
differing ways to treat severe poison. For a less venomous creature,  the
system given for Fire Ants may be used.

It is also possible that ?he bite of a creature -especially a Scavenger - may
lead to infection, The Base Chance for infection from an ordinary wound (see
Section 23) is 20%.  This chance should be doubled, at a minimum,  for any bite
from a scavenging creature. Claw injuries from a scavenger should be treated in
the same fashion.

A very large creature will ????have a ''trampling'' attack in Close Combat.
Damage from a trample is type D, and is typically very high: +5 to +10,

MONSTER DESCRIPTION SHEET

For each new monster or creature he invents, the CM should fill out a sheet
as below. This will serve both as a worksheet to insure that the creature's
characteristics have been adeq?ately fleshed out, and as a reference sheet when
the creature is in play.  Players may also wish to start a sheet of their own
for 'each new creature that they encounter, as a means of organizing the
information that they gather.

The various characteristics are described in section 65. When in doubt as to
what characteristic to assign a creature,  the GM may refer to a similar
creature already described within section 65, and work from there.

As a rule, creatures will have no talents,  skills, or magic.  Exceptions
should be noted in all necessary detail on the record sheet. Talents, skills,
and magic are normally the provenance of intelligent creatures, but an animal
may occasionally have an innate ability that is the equivalent of one of these.
Used sparingly, this improves play.

Pl?yers ?nd C?!s ?re frce to make as m?ny copic? of this for? as they m?y
require for their own use.

SPECIALIZED CREATURES

Certain creatures may be rare because they are highly specialized. Such
creatures will be shown (usually with a very low frequency) on the Ecology
Chart in their appro?riate niche. Actually, such a creature occupies a sub-
niche and d6es not compete directly with the other species in its niche.
Development of peculiar and specialized creatures adds a great deal of interest
to an ecology.

One example of such a specialized creature might be a ''large predator'' - a
man-sized, aggressive lizard with a poisonous bite. It-eats only snakes,
which are not common -thus,  the lizard?s not often seen. But, due to its bad
temper and venomous bite,  it is widely feared. Another possibility might be
a ''giant herbivore'' - a huge armored mammal. But its rabbitlike young are
unarmored, and only one in a thousand sur?ives to the armor-plated stage. The
full-grown creature can reach the tops of trees, and therefore has a food
source available to no other beasts. Thus,  its survival as a species is
likely, even though its reproductive rate is effectively very low.


