h39182
s 00222/00000/00000
d D 1.1 99/12/02 16:00:41 jmochel 2 1
cC
cK61814
cO-rw-rw-rw-
e
s 00000/00000/00000
d D 1.0 99/12/02 16:00:38 jmochel 1 0
c BitKeeper file G:/SpaceHybrid/worlds/confed/Flavor/Ancestors.conversation.txt
cBjmochel@devilmountain.bedford.foliage.com|ChangeSet|19991202203126|52994|e2968a7f5cb68f67
cHdevilmountain.bedford.foliage.com
cK45004
cPworlds/confed/Flavor/Ancestors.conversation.txt
cReb4786505cb68f68
cZ-05:00
c______________________________________________________________________
e
u
U
f e 0
f x 33
t
T
I 2
"Ancestors"

Scene: City of First Landing on Elysia
Newly built lecture room in the Hall of the Life Council.

The room was already full when she walked in. She paused, savoring the
experience, it had been years since she last seen more than a handful of
her sisters. A discrete cough from one of the Sraetrie heads sent her
scrambling to the podium. With a laugh she nodded to her audience.

"I am suprised to see this turnout. I had expected only to see the Life
Council here. But, I suppose there is no one here who doesn't have a
vested interest in my research." 

She rapidly reconsidered her approach to the topic.

"A quick covering of recent history is in order. I am MishKa 71. After
Rediscovery the life council sent me to Terra with a two-fold task. My
first job was to establish a baseline set of metrics for relations with
the Terrans. The second and equally important task was to compile the
biographies of the first sisters. I am happy to report that the latter
project was a success. I was able to get historical information on
almost all of the sisters."

"The former task is not yet complete, nor will it be in my lifetime. It
is merely well begun. And this is the topic heart of all else I wish to
discuss. "

"The Terrans are not the homogeneous society that we thought. The first
sisters left out a great deal of context in their notes and journals. It
is unsuprising, they could not have conveyed what I found waiting for me
and still had time to found a colony. Each Terran brings with them a
collection of taboos, traditions, mores, images, and habits derived from
a myriad of identifications. Most of them identify themselves with as a
combination of gender, cultural, political, religious, career or craft,
hobby archtypes. Many maintain an identity based on political boundaries
or geographic features that haven't existed in over two hundred years !
It is not that they don't come up with new identifications, they just
don't put any down. "

"I won't say that the culture is insane. I will say that common
relationship guidelines for us will be much more a guideline than that
devised for the near-static Proximan culture. As a case in point I wish
to point to the current image of Elysians in Terran popular culture. At
this point in time Elysia is viewed as a rebirth of eutopian Greek
culture. Greece was one of the many political groupings that existed
before the last war on Terra. It provided the basis for one of the major
paradigms of thought and process that led to the formation of the hard
sciences as we know it."

"After a great deal of research I can say with some finality that the
First Sisters did not design Elysia as a model of Greek culture. They
did borrow a great deal of names, terminology, and a few institutions.
Their reasoning is unclear to me; I am sure that it will provide 
graduates with grist for research papers for years to come. They also 
borrowed from many other cultures. We are truly a synthesis society."

"Back to the Terran image of Elysia. Whether or not we wanted it we have
acquired some of the characteristics associated with this semi-mythical
culture. One of these attributes is that of wisdom as exemplified by the
Greek goddess of wisdom, Athena." 

A ripple of suprise ran through the crowd and echoed off the walls. 

"Indeed, I have already noted that the sister who founded the Life
Centers had a questionable sense of humor, given to punning as well as
literary and historical allusions. My name has several meanings in her
time including those of a prostitute, a perjorative term for something
like our licensed surrogates. I am given to understand that she and
Mellisa Kane did not get along well. My guess is that the Athena line
name came from some sort of unofficial title since the name Ti'Chae Jong
does not seem to compress to Athena."

"In addition to wisdom the other attribute is that of naked war-like
aggression." 

With an impish grin in the face of their obvious shock she continued.

"It seems that one of the myths attached to the Greek archtype is that
of a race of women given to war as a way of life. They surgicaly removed
their right teat to better draw a bow for combat. In addition all
breeding was done by mating with captured males and then killing them.
These women, known as the Amazons, were taller than average and very
dangerous."

Her grin twisted to something bitter-sweet.

"The image is strong enough that one man offered to be mated
with and killed and almost all of the Terran males I have met have
assumed that I am a skilled combatant. That our general level of fitness 
is greater than the average Terran's only reinforces it."

"Oh no sisters, we can't lay all the blame on their nearsightedness. The
Life Council's first decision on interaction with the Confederation has
led to a limited range of individuals going out among them. In addition
to the councilors the most publicly visible Elysians have been KaRBan
333, KaRBan 541, and Sassa 118. KaRBan 333 was just promoted to Field
Commander in the MI and Sassa has just been awarded the Confederation
Medal of honor. Is is any suprise they think of us as war-like ?"

"What is more, this is not neccessarily a bad image. It has saved one of
my researchers from an assault for sex, a not uncommon crime."

"I will state it simply: the Confederation is a very sick, brutal place
in many ways and many of the left-over identifications make it more
hostile for Elysians. Our necessary psycho-sexual adaptations to the
founding still make many Terrans uncomfortable. Not at the level of law,
but the at the level of mores. The two do not go hand in hand on Terra
and mores are the stronger of them."

"My recommendations for interaction are a compromise between what we
would like to be and what I think we must be to survive within the
Confederation. They include a required level of proficiency at
hand-to-hand combat for anyone traveling in the Confederation or a very
competent body-guard. My goal is to establish that the Elysians are so
self-sufficient and competent that to attack one is the sheerest folly."

"In this we are helped by another identification. The Terran's refer to
it as the 'Thelma and Louise Syndrome'. As one of my Terran colleagues
phrased it: 'When a woman kicks butt she is the underdog victorious. She
is in the right because no women would fight unless it were justified'.
Thus my concurrent suggestions to establish an image of innocence among
those competent in combat, to better allow them to dodge the strictures
of local law enforcement."

Visibly steeling herself she went on.

"Last, but not least, my final suggestion is a request that the Life Council 
reconsider a line decision."

Already alert, the audience took on a mood of quiet intent.

"Just before I took my leave the council decided that there would be no more births 
of the line KaRBan. At the time, it seemed a prudent decision. The social costs of 
raising the line seemed out of proportion to the gains. I believe that situation has changed
enough to have us reconsider."

She pulled out a plasfilm file. 

"Karole Rhys-Banner, born Karole Banner in the country Ireland. There are 
few internal records of that time in Ireland's history. At the time a newly 
risen religous organization was involved in establishing a solid Theocratic 
hold on the country, destroying most secular records. What I was able to 
discover of Ireland came from other countries, all of whom had a political 
stake in some way in the outcome of this struggle."

"What we do know is that she was labeled with a perjorative indicating
that she had only one parent. She is recorded to have partaken of many
of the observances linked to the religion. Since it was a state religion
and in the absence of notes from her, we can only speculate on the
voluntary nature of that participation. We also know that women had
rights only as a child would, held in loco-parentis by the male head of
the family unit. Of the rest of the social climate I will only say that 
Scourgings, Trials of Faith, and Shunning sound better in their names 
then they were in practice."

"She was married at age 15 to Sean Herriot, a male, and gave birth to a
female child named Caitlin. Thereafter we lose track of her though
Caitlin's death four years later was recorded. I was able to confirm
that she escaped to another country, called Switzerland at about age 20
in Terran years. There she contracted a marriage with a soldier named
Markus Rhys-Kuhns. We have more detail from that time period since the
Swiss seemed to be notable record keepers. She gave birth to two more
males, Rikard Conroy Rhys-Banner and Sims Arkady Rhys-Banner. I was
unable to determine the signifigance of the merged surnames."

"Over the years she became a devotee of La Savate, a form of unarmed
combat and an officer in the Swiss Atmospheric Defense
Forces. We have some of her speeches from that time period 
recorded for the archives. 15 years from the time she left Ireland 
she became a politician and was instrumental in keeping Switzerland 
an intact world power through two major wars."

"At age 57, for reasons apparently known only to her, she went back to 
Ireland and became the driving force and organization for a women's 
rebellion against the theocracy. Three years later she was caught, tried and 
sentenced to death by Ireland's ruling Tribunal. One week later, the 
sentence was carried out and broadcast over public media. Within two weeks the Tribunal 
and its order were overturned by spontaneous uprisings through out the country. Nine months later 
she shipped out aboard our colony ship."

She smiled again, the imp coming to the fore. 

"It took 4 years of digging through the lore of her family and many
others as well as commercial and government archives to piece together
what happened. She escaped, as planned, through a ruse that made it look
like she had been killed by their security and the Tribunal faked her
death rather than admit it. The resulting revolution seems to have been
her aim, or part of it. The other results were not. When the mobs
reached the site of her burial and opened the coffin, they found no body
and no one alive who could describe what happened. It was determined
that she had been a messenger from their god, sent to free them. Within
months she was declared a saint, a kind of avatar of their god and a
formal holiday was established in her name."

"As she saw it her only choice was to leave and, after she arranged for
the continued well being of her family she did so."

She paused for a sip of water and a breath.

"We have always strived to arrange for harmony among our sisters and
sometimes that striving has hidden the 'why'. Harmony has been our tool
for ensuring that our sisters have a chance to become all that they have
the potential to be. To be all of the possibility they are. In ensuring
the that Elysia, as a culture, survives and thrives as a member of the
Confederation we may have to choose a different mix of harmony and
discord."

"To that end I ask that service in the Confederation armed services
generate Social Duty credits at the same rate as parenting and that we
make that option known to our daughters. I also ask that daughters of
line KaRBan again be granted to us. Not in any greater proportion than
before, but that we have that option. Karole Rhys-Banner is a
possibility we may have need of again."

She smiled, a full 200 watts, and looked around. 

"Have I mentioned that I am glad to be home ?"




E 2
I 1
E 1
