



   Go to Google alt.history.future "futur   Google Search   • Advanced Groups Se
                                                            • Groups Help
                    Search all groups     Search the Web
                  *
    Groups search result 8 for alt.history.future "future history"


    From: Caesar (Caesar@augur.demon.co.uk)                    Search Result 8
    Subject: A nightmarish future history of Britain
    Newsgroups: alt.history.future
    Date:    View: (This is the only article in this thread) | Original Format
    1996/12/22


   A NIGHMARE CHRONOLOGY OF BRITAIN'S FUTURE
   =========================================


   The Labour government elected in 1997 had an overall majority of
   just 15. During the course of 1997-2001, it was whittled down by
   by-election losses to 2.

   In June 2001, the Labour government faced an election. The
   economy showed signs of a recession. A stockmarket crash in
   March 2001 was eliminating the feel-good factor for the
   share-owning middle-classes. The decision to hold the general
   election in 2001 rather than in 2002 was because the
   government didn't think their popularity would improve
   that much over the next year.

   The Conservative Party ran a masterful campaign from Conservative
   Central Office. They promised tax cuts and a less "craven attitude"
   towards Europe.

   The Tories' anti-European campaign annoyed many pro-Europeans.
   However, most of them bit their tounges due to party loyalty. The
   few that raised their voices in objections were a tiny minority. Many
   left-wingers were elderly. Their influence was on the wane. The
   right-wing tendency in the Tory Party was growing rapidly. Despite
   the fact that the Labour government had decided not to join
   the European single currency in the 1997-2001, the Tories were
   campaigning as if Labour were certain to join it if they won re-election.
   It enabled them to play the patriotic and xenophobic card. The
   Tories managed to outspend Labour by 3 to 1 during the course of
   the four-week election campaign. They managed to get most of the
   good poster sites.

   The results of the June 2001 election were:

   Conservatives                                   332 seats
   Labour                                          276 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                23 seats
   SNP                                               6 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       4 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   The Conservatives with 39.8% of the UK popular vote had got a
   majority of 5 in the House of Commons. PM John Henderson (fictional)
   appointed a balanced complement of ministers (from both the left and right
   of the party) within 48 hours of assuming office.

   Labour fell into disarray after the election defeat. Tony Blair
   announced his resignation as party leader. Intra-party fighting
   broke out as the left-wing felt that they had been betrayed
   by the right-wing policies of Blair's 1997-2001 government.

   In October 2001, Peter Mandelson was elected as Labour
   Party leader. 1/4 of the PLP resigned from the Labour Party.
   These 69 rebel MPs were left-wingers who were dissolusioned with
   the fact that Mandelson would continue Blair's mission of
   moving the party to the right. 67 of the 69 rebel MPs decided
   to form a new party. They called it the Democratic Socialist
   Party (DSP). Their aim was to form a left-wing force which would be
   able to exert its influence on the political system.

   The November 2001 budget cut the basic rate on income tax from
   23% to 22%. It abolished the 50% top rate of income tax also.
   The income tax rates were now: 15% (lower rate), 22% (basic rate) and
   40% (higher rate). However, to try to offset revenue losses from
   tax cuts and to reduce the PSBR the rate of VAT was increased
   from 19% to 24% and its scope was increased.

   During 2002, the Tories passed legislation which abolished
   the Scottish and Welsh parliaments which Labour had introduced.
   These toothless bodies (they had no tax-raising powers) had
   been first elected in 1999. They would serve just one
   four year term (1999-2003) before their abolition.

   The Conservative majority fell from 5 to 3 as a left-wing MP
   defected to the Liberal Democrats. The majority then fell from 3 to
   1 as the Conservatives lost a by-election.

   In November 2002, the budget cut the top rate of income tax from
   40% to 35%. The PSBR was forecast to rise, as the government
   did not cut spending. It was clear that John Henderson wanted to avoid
   a conflict when he had such a slim majority.

   During 2003, the Conservative government became a minority government
   as it lost a further by-election. However, the Tories managed
   to survive a vote of no confidence with a majority of 2.

   In November 2003, the budget announced the merging of the 22% and
   15% tax bands (i.e. a 7% cut in the basic rate of income tax). This
   tax cut was clearly designed to bribe voters. Very few public
   spending cuts were imposed.

   The government called a general election with 36 hours of the budget.
   The election campaign meant that the election would be held
   in mid-December.

   During the period 2002-3, the DSP had been increasing its
   support at the expense of Labour. Many Labour activists resigned
   from the party and joined the DSP. They wanted genuinely left-wing
   politics.

   The December 2003 general election results were:

   Conservatives                                   381 seats
   Labour                                          161 seats
   DSP                                              58 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                29 seats
   SNP                                               8 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       4 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   Despite their share of the popular vote only rising from 39.8% to
   40.2%, the Conservatives made a net gain of 49 seats. They now
   had an overall majority of 103. This was due to the former Labour
   vote being split between the Labour Party and the new DSP. The
   DSP had only stood in 319 seats, but had done very well (comapred
   to what pundits expected).

   Immeadiately after the election, PM Henderson appointed a new
   ministerial team. The left-wingers had been purged. The new
   Cabinet was right-wing.

   John Henderson wanted to abolish the House of Lords. In 1998, Labour
   had disenfranchised the heriditary peers who sat in it. Now
   only life peers had the right to vote there. John Henderson
   didn't like the idea of the House of Lords as the Conservatives
   didn't have a majority there (cross-benchers + the Opposition
   easily outnumbered them). In 2004, an attempt was made to
   abolish the House of Lords. The Lords defeated it. In 2005, the
   Bill was re-submitted and, under the provisions of the Parliament
   Act, it was passed despite Lords' opposition.

   PM Henderson pushed ahead with the privatization of the BBC, a plan
   which had been first mooted in his first term. The sale
   gained extra revenue for the government.

   From 2004 onwards, the economy started to step out of the 2001-3 recession.
   Unemployment, which had risen from 7.1% of the labour force to
   9.9% started to fall. Low-pay, though, increased, as the Tories
   scrapped the œ3.50/hour minimum wage.

   In 2001/2, the financial year in which the Tories assumed office,
   government spending amounted to 44.5% of GDP. PM Henderson had
   a long-term view to reduce it drastically. He wanted it to fall
   below the US level of 39% of GDP and then fall further. European
   levels of public spending were an anethma to him.

   In March 2005, John Henderson went to an EU heads of government
   meeting. As part of his attempt to secure cuts in public spending,
   he wanted Britain's contributions to the EU (approx. 0.86% of UK
   GDP), to be cut by 40% in real terms by 2007. The other EU
   heads of government refused. John Henderson then, in a fit of
   pique, announced that Britain would be withdrawing from the EU.

   Britain's withdrawal from the EU (the only country to have done so)
   pleased many right-wing Tories. The DSP were also fairly keen on
   the idea. The tiny minority of remaining left-wing Tories were
   dismayed. 4 of them defected to the Liberal Democrats. This
   only made a very slight dent in the Conservative majority.

   Negociations between Britain and the EU ran from April to November
   2005. Britain would have tariff-free access to the single-market, like
   Norway, and be part of EEA (the European Economic Area). However,
   the EU regional development funds which poorer areas of
   Britain received would end.

   The withdrawal from the EU didn't seem to hurt the British economic
   recovery that much, as Britain had tariff-free access to the
   single market. But some people lost out greatly, such as farmers
   and those living in areas in reciept of EU funds, as EU grants
   dried up.

   Throughout 2006, the Boundries Commission started to carry out
   a review of parliamentary constituency boundries. The Tories
   hoped to benefit from a boundries change.

   CCO attempted to gain more influence over the Conservative Party's
   national organization. If constituency parties wanted their
   candidate, if elected, to take the Conservative Party whip,
   then they would have to select from a list of approved candidates issued
   by CCO. By using this method, Henderson knew that he would be able
   to control who became an MP.

   In April 2007, the new consituency boundries were put before
   the House of Commons (now the sole House of Parliament, following
   the abolition of the House of Lords). They were passed. There
   would be 660 (up by 1) seats in the House of Commons after
   the next election.

   CCO's approved list of candidates had just 659 names on (there
   were 641 Conservative constituency parties nationwide). This meant
   that nearly everyone named on the list would become an Tory candidate.
   Anyone not on the list had lost the chance to be a Conservative
   candidate. 5 MPs (left-wingers and people who Henderson had
   a grudge against) were left out. They wouldn't be able to find a new seat.

   The economic boom was still taking place, although it was clear
   that the richer sections of society were the only ones benefitting
   from it.

   Early in 2008, John Henderson announced that there would be a
   general election. Polling day would be in March 2008, after a
   long campaign.

   The centre vote and the left-wing vote would be split between
   the DSP, Labour and the Liberal Democrats. This meant that
   the Tories would be able to win on a split opposition vote.
   The DSP had increased the number of seats it was contesting
   to 499.

   The results of the March 2008 election were:

   Conservatives                                   376 seats
   Labour                                          141 seats
   DSP                                              71 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                39 seats
   SNP                                              11 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       4 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   The Conservative Party's share of the vote had fallen from 40.2%
   in 2003 to 37.7% now. However, the split opposition vote had
   enabled them to get an overall majority of 92, only slightly
   down on last time.

   In their election campaign, the Conservatives had promised further
   tax cuts. The basic rate of income tax had been reduced from 15% to 13%
   in November 2007, and the higher rate was cut to only 26%. Capital
   gains tax and inheritance tax had also been abolished in
   the 2003-8 parliament.

   However, the November 2008 budget, the soaring PSBR (standing
   at 7.9% of GDP, amazingly high in a boom) meant that VAT had
   to be raised to cut the PSBR. VAT went up from 24% to 29%. This
   regressive tax meant that the poor would be paying even more tax.

   In an attempt to reduce the cost of pensions, the Conservative government
   ammended legislation in early 2009. Instead of state pensions increasing
   by the RPI every year, they would increase by RPI-1% every year. This
   penny-pinching act would sink many working-class pensioners
   further into poverty.

   In September 2009, hanging was re-introduced. This was an attempt
   by the Tories to seem 'tough on crime', given the growing
   crime rate. Opposition to the bill was muffled, as Labour
   didn't want to be portrayed as 'soft on crime' by right-wing
   papers. Principled opposition to the cruelty of the death penalty
   was not really heard.

   From the begining of 2010, the economy started to sink into
   recession. This was due to falling exports and to the high
   interest rates (15%) being imposed to keep inflation (3.2%) down.
   Unemployment started to rise from 6.9%.

   In November 2010, the government announced a budget which
   was aimed to kick the economy out of recession. The top
   rate of income tax (26%) was abolished (all income tax was now at a
   flat rate of 13%) in an attempt to "boost incentives". Right-wing
   economists applauded the "flat-rate tax". However, to try and
   offset the revenue loss due to this, the rate of VAT was
   increased from 29% to 32%. Councils were also allowed to
   raise their council taxes by up to 44% to cover the
   reductions in government grants they had suffered. Other taxes
   were also increased. Despite this, the PSBR was still growing.

   VAT evasion was a growing pastime. Tax revenues were always
   less than had been predicted. Many traders submitted
   fraudulent VAT returns. This exasserbated the problem
   of the PSBR.

   In an attempt to stop the growth of public spending, PM Henderson
   ordered cuts to be made in the Social Security budget. Many
   people living in poverty were affected by this paultry act.

   Meanwhile, the prison population continued to soar. It reached
   300,000 in May 2011. The government still continued with
   the expensive activity of locking people up to try and persuade
   right-wing newspaper editors that it was being tough on
   crime.

   The recession was getting worse. However, the government's response
   was to cut public spending further because they had vowed (to
   the financial markets) that they would cut the PSBR. Social Security benefits
   health funding and education were cut.

   In November 2011, the government allowed local authorities to charge
   an extra car tax and taxes on bicycles. This was to continue
   to fund them as government grants were pared back further. The
   budget cut the rate of income tax from 13% to 12.5%. "It was
   at its lowest level for over a century", boasted Tories.

   PM Henderson was encouraged by the strong showing of the DSP
   in polls and the growth of their strength in consituencies
   because he knew it would split the anti-Tory vote. The SNP's excellent
   showing in Scotland also was good news for the Tories as the Opposition
   would be kept on their toes.

   PM Henderson decided to call a general election. This was despite
   the recession. He felt that the splits in the anti-Tory vote
   would offset the effect of the recession and so enable him
   to remain in office.

   The results of the May 2012 elections were:

   Conservatives                                   346 seats
   Labour                                          134 seats
   DSP                                              84 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                42 seats
   SNP                                              31 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       5 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   The Conservatives had polled only 30.5% of the actual votes cast in
   the UK as a whole. However, the first-past-the-post system
   enabled them to have an overall majority of 32.

   Despite polling only 35.6% of the popular vote in Scotland, the SNP
   had won 31 of the 61 parliamentary seats in Scotland. The three-way
   split in the non-SNP, non-Tory vote enabled them to do this. The
   SNP claimed a moral mandate for independence.

   PM Henderson was enamoured with the idea of Scotland leaving
   the UK. After all, there weren't any Conservative MPs in
   Scotland any more (the last one had lost his seat in the
   May 2012 general election) and the Tories had
   only polled 8.6% of the popular vote north of the border.

   He started negociations with the SNP for independence. Labour, the DSP
   and the Lib-Dems all complained that there should be a referendum
   in Scotland to find the public demand for independence. However,
   John Henderson claimed that the SNP's first-past-the-post dominance
   in terms of the Scottish seat tally meant that they had a mandate.

   The UK government-SNP negociations decided that Scotland
   would gain its independence (as the Republic of Scotland) on
   1 January 2013. The debts of the UK government would be divided
   between Scotland and the rump UK. There would be free trade and
   free movement of people between Scotland and the UK. Scotland
   would have its own free-floating currency, the Scottish shilling.

   Following Scotland's independence, John Henderson found his
   position strengthened in the Parliament of the United Kingdom
   of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Conservatives
   had 345 (1 Tory MP died and the Lib-Dems won the by-election) of the
   599 remaining parliamentary seats. They had a
   majority of 91.

   The recession started to be easing in the UK. Unemployment remained
   stobbornly high at 13.5% of the workforce and over 36% of the
   UK population were defined as living in poverty. However, GDP/capita
   was estimated to have grown by 0.3% in the 2nd quarter of 2013. Most
   of this growth went to the upper two dectiles of the population.

   PM Henderson decided to make the extraordinary decision to move the
   2013 budget forward from November to July. The reason was
   simple. He wanted an early election.

   The July budget cut the rate of income tax from 12.5% to 11.5%. The
   election campaign then started in earnest.

   The DSP, Labour and the Lib-Dems were now contesting every single
   seat in England and Wales. This meant that there was nationwide
   vote-splitting. Tory support in the polls was still low, but
   the Tories believed that they could win once again on a split
   vote.

   The results of the August 2013 general election were:

   Conservatives                                   333 seats
   Labour                                          145 seats
   DSP                                              51 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                47 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       5 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   The Conservatives polled 31.1% of the popular vote. They had
   an overall majority of 67. PM Henderson had won his fifth successive
   election.

   Labour got another new leader, Paul Preston, in October. He
   was its 5th leader in 10 years. He was determined to push ahead
   with his plan of moving Labour still further to the right. He
   also wanted to get rid of the historical baggage which he
   felt was hampering Labour's vote-garnering abilities.

   In June 2014, a special Labour confernce narrowly voted to change the
   name of the party to the Reform Party. It would sever its (already
   weak) links with the dying trade union movement. Paul Preston's
   dream had come true.

   Rebel Labourites (about 1/5 of the PLP and 1/3 of the membership)
   resigned in protest. They said that they would retain the old
   name and still contest elections as the Labour Party. They
   would be splitting the left-wing vote further by doing so. The
   Reform Party's birth was, thus, overshadowed by acrimony.

   PM Henderson decided to continue with his plans to reduce the
   role of the state still further. The rate of increase
   of pensions would be cut from RPI-1% to RPI-2%. Also, the
   retirement age would be raised by 3 months every year from
   January 2015. This was a further attenmpt to trim the Social
   Security budget. Pensioners, many of whom voted Tory, were
   outraged.

   In mid-2015, CCO (Conservative Central Office) was re-organized. It was
   told to close down 181 of the 581 local Conservative associations. John
   Henderson knew that those 181 seats were hopeless for the
   Conservatives to win. There was no point expending effort
   contesting their. The Conservatives were becoming a
   regional party, one of the South and Midlands of England. CCO's
   approved candidate list had just 400 places. CCO was now dictating
   who future Tory MPs would be. Every one on the list would be a
   candidate.

   As of September 2016, the Schooling Vouchers Act came into effect.
   It gave all parents of 5-16 year-olds vouchers (varying in
   value depending on the age of the child) which they could
   use to buy education from either state schools or private schools.
   Heads of the 20,291 state schools in Britain protested, because
   they said that the voucher money and the remnants of state grants amounted
   to only 81% of an average school's running cost. The Department of
   Education's reply was that schools would have to charge parents
   top-up fees. Free state education was at an end.

   The government also embarked on a very ambitious school
   closure programme, wanting to cut the number of state schools to 15,000
   by 2019. This was to reduce the amount they had to give
   to "financially unviable" schools as grants (grants in any
   case were too low, they only amounted to less than 1/6 of the money
   schools got in vouchers).

   In November 2016, the rate of VAT was increased to 35%. This extra
   money was needed because the costs of servicing the government's
   debt was increasing. Other taxes too went up sharply.

   In April 2017, Britain's prison population exceeded 500,000. The
   number of hangings stood at 100 for financial year 2016/7. The
   public's thirst for vengence, though, had still not gone.

   PM Henderson, in June 2017, sacked the Chancellor of the Exchequer
   and 5 other Cabinet ministers. 6 out of the 20 Cabinet members had
   gone. It was Henderson's biggest reshuffle in the 16 years he had
   been in office. Maybe he was making too many enemies. The 6th
   Chancellor of the Exchequer to serve under John Henderson took office.
   He was given a brief to find room for pre-election tax cuts.

   The November 2017 budget announced a cut in the rate of income
   tax from 11.5% to 10%. This vote-garnering gimmick was
   aimed to help the Tories do well in the forthcoming general election.

   However, the 2013-7 economic boom was over. During those 5 years,
   GDP/capita had risen by 28%, but median incomes had risen
   by just 2%. The benefit of the boom had gone to the upper 2 or 3
   dectiles of the population. This boom was now petering out in a recession.

   Despite the recession, PM Henderson named the election date as
   in February 2018.

   The NHS, once a service providing decent healthcare for all on the
   basis of clinical need, not wealth, had disintegrated. There
   was now only 1 NHS doctor for every 2,307 Britons (compared
   to 1 NHS doctor for just 511 people in 2004). Waiting lists
   for even the most basic treatments were over a year long. The
   Opposition campaigned strongly on this issue, as only 45% of
   the population were able to afford to have private medical insurance.

   The results of the February 2018 election were:

   Conservatives                                   300 seats
   Reform                                          127 seats
   DSP                                              91 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                36 seats
   Labour                                           22 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       5 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     18 seats

   The Tories had polled just 27.3% of the popular vote. The
   first-past-the-post system ensured, though, that they
   had an overall majority of 1.

   Labour had done worse than expected, winning 22 out of the 193 seats
   they contested. Reform and the DSP had done well. The Lib-Dems
   did poorly, losing seats.

   Charles O'Brian, a young Tory MP, decided that the ranks of the
   Reform Party would suit him better if he couldn't get a
   ministerial post. He demanded that John Henderson, in his
   post-election ministerial reshuffle, appoint him as one
   of the 113 government ministers. PM Henderson refused. O'Brian
   defected.

   PM Henderson's government was now without a majority. He made
   a deal with the 7 Ulster Unionist MPs. He would appoint a
   UUP Secretary of State for Northern Ireland so long as
   they supported his government. This deal was agreed.

   The recession got worse rapidly. The vagarities of the international
   economy were affecting the whole world, but they were hitting Britain
   hard.

   In the November 2018 budget, pensions were frozen (a 4% real terms
   cut), the value of school vouchers was slashed by 30% in real
   terms, the NHS suffered a 10% real terms cut in funding and provison was
   made for sacking 15% of the police force. This brutal budget
   was urged by Henderson upon his Chancellor so that the government
   would have enough money to cut the PSBR.

   This budget, carried by 291 votes to 290, was detested by
   many people in the country as a whole. Riots broke out in
   several times as the extent of cuts in unemployment benefit was
   known. 144 people died in rioting.

   The government appointed a Boundries Commission, dominated by
   former Conservative MPs. The aim of this was to gerrymander
   seats so that the Tories would do well in the next election.

   The government passed the Sentencing Act 2019 in an attempt to
   reduce the costs of incarcerating people. The prison population
   of 590,000 had to be reduced as the financial cost of keeping it locked
   up were too great. The Act allowed 150,000 prisoners to be
   released prematurely in the six months after it came into
   effect in May 2019.

   As a further condition of the deal with the UUP, all ministers
   in the Northern Ireland Office [the Secretary of State + the 3
   junior ministers] were UUP MPs after the June 2019 Cabinet reshuffle.
   The number of UUP ministers had gone up from 1 to 4. Now 4 of
   the 7 UUP MPs were ministers.

   Terrorism increased on the mainland. A bomb blast in Birmingham
   killed 111 people. The IRA claimed responsibility.

   In November 2019, the budget made further dramatic spending cuts.
   School vouchers' value would be cut by a further 20% (making a cumiliative
   44% cut over the last 2 budgets). NHS hospitals and all their
   staff would be privatized and transferred to private buyers. NHS
   doctors' surgeries (already abysmal) would
   lose state funding by the end of 2020. Pensions would suffer a
   5% nominal cut in their value, as would other state benefits (i.e.
   a real terms cut of about 8%).

   The budget vote resulted in a 292-292 tie. The Speaker broke
   the deadlock by supporting the Budget Bill. The budget was passed
   and recieved Royal Assent as normal.

   After the budget, the recession continued. An estimated 28% of
   adult males (aged 25-66) who wanted jobs couldn't find them.
   The offical unemployment rate (which widely underestimated
   unemployment) stated that 16.7% of the population were without
   a job.

   In December 2019, PM John Henderson announced his resignation. He
   had served as prime minister for 18 years and 6 months. He had
   presided over a radical shrinking of the role of the state
   and the tax burden. But, the result of the shrinking
   of the state had been a widening of the huge gulf between rich
   and poor. Government spending as a percentage of GDP, which
   had been 44.5% when he assumed office was now 30.7%. The
   percentage of the nation's wealth owned by the richest 1%
   of the population had soared from 19% to 38%. The percentage
   of the national wealth owned by the poorest 50% of the population
   had fallen from 7% to only 3%. The poor had failed to share
   in the prosperity of the Henderson years. Now, even that prosperity
   was crumbling in recession.

   The 298 Conservative Party MPs elected Edward King as their new
   leader and thus as the new prime minister. Edward King was a
   right-winger too, just like Henderson, his long-serving predecessor.

   The public were feeling the worsening impact of the recession.
   The suicide rate shot up, as did the crime rate. The virtual
   end of the NHS meant that poor people who were ill or injured
   could not get medical treatment.

   The inflation rate turned negative as there were far more goods
   and services than people prepared to buy them.

   In November 2020, further huge cuts were made in pensions. The
   Conservatives had now alienated most of their traditional
   consitutency of the over-60s. The budget included a tax cut
   from 10% to 9%, which was hoped would keep Tory support afloat.

   Edward King decided to call an general election, as the boundries for
   the 605 new parliamentary constituencies had been introduced. The
   opposition parties complained that they were biased towards
   the Conservatives.

   The Tories were only putting up 377 candidates. They viewed
   the other 228 seats as a waste of time to contest. This
   was because they were poor areas where the Tory vote would
   have been abysmal.

   The economic indicators were bad for the Tories. The economy
   had shrunk by 18% in the period 2018-2020.

   In January 2021, the nation went to the polls. Edward King
   hoped the Tories could win a majority on their own so
   that they did not have to continue the coalition with the
   Ulster Unionists.

   The results of the January 2021 elections were:

   Conservatives                                   309 seats
   DSP                                             170 seats
   Reform                                           48 seats
   Labour                                           28 seats
   Liberal Democrats                                26 seats
   Plaid Cymru                                       5 seats
   N.I. Parties                                     19 seats

   The Conservatives had got an overall majority of 13, yet had
   only polled 24.9% of the total votes cast. Three-quarters
   of the electorate had not voted for the Tories. Those that
   had were mainly from the rich minority of people who had benefitted
   from the long years of Henderson rule.

   The DSP had gained hugely. They had taken votes away from the
   moderate Reform and Liberal Democrat parties. They advocated
   radical nationalization and huge taxes on wealth and income. They
   wanted to "hammer the Tory thieves". They were a radical
   left-wing party.

   The DSP and other opposition parties accused the Tories
   of having a "gerrymandered mandate". They pointed out
   that the adult population of Tory-held seats was 23% less
   than that of non-Tory held seats. This strongly suggested
   gerrymandering.

   On March 11 2021, Prime Minister Edward King was killed as he
   walked out of the House of Commons, following an emergency
   debate on the economy. Four masked assassins opened fire
   on him. All the assassins were killed by King's bodyguards,
   but not before they had assassinated King and killed 4 of his
   bodyguards.

   --


              Google Web Directory - Cool Jobs - Advertise with Us -
       Add Google to Your Site - Google in Your Language - All About Google


                                   ©2001 Google
