



             Watchman Fellowship’s 2000 Index of Cults and Religions


   By the Staff of Watchman Fellowship, Inc. 

   Introduction

   Please read “A Word from the President” to learn more about the
   educational rationale we followed in creating this index.


   Annually Watchman Fellowship publishes an index issue of the Watchman
   Expositor. The 2000 Index contains brief definitions, descriptions or
   cross references on over 1,200 religious organizations and beliefs. This
   year’s index is expanded to include world religions (including
   Christianity) and related doctrines. Watchman Fellowship is a Christian
   apologetics and discernment ministry (please see Publication Information).
   Thus, many references (“Jesus,” “Gospel,” “Christianity,” etc.) contain
   definitions that reflect the beliefs of Watchman’s staff. While Watchman
   Fellowship does not hold to the beliefs of non-Christian religions and
   doctrines, we also attempt to describe these beliefs factually, fairly and
   accurately. Readers are asked to assist in this effort by suggesting
   corrections or improvements (please read A Word from the President). 

   This is by no means a complete list of cults and religions. Watchman
   Fellowship maintains over 10,000 files and a research library of over
   25,000 books and periodicals on religions, cults, new religious movements
   and related teachings. The absence of a religious movement from this index
   does not mean that Watchman Fellowship endorses the organization. 


   How To Use This Index

   Begin your search by clicking on the highlighted letter below that is the
   first letter of the term for which you are searching (or, if your browser
   will do so, perform a word search for the term). If the term is listed, it
   will be followed by a brief definition. Most of these definitions contain
   highlighted words that are linked to the definitions for those words;
   clicking on the highlighted word will take you directly to that
   definition. 


    A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S
                           | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z



   Some Definitions

   By using the terms “cult,” “occult,” and “New Age,” Watchman Fellowship is
   in no way implying that the followers or leaders are necessarily evil or
   immoral people. It simply means that such groups seem to promote doctrine
   or practices which may be considered outside the realm of historic
   Christianity. 


   Cult

   By its primary dictionary definition, the term cult just means a system of
   religious beliefs or rituals. It is based on a farming term in Latin
   meaning cultivation. Sociologists and anthropologists sometimes use the
   term cult to describe religious structure or belief patterns with meanings
   (usually non-pejorative) unique to their disciplines. In modern usage, the
   term cult is often used by the general public to describe any religious
   group they view as strange or dangerous. Thus, cult can describe religious
   leaders or organizations that employ abusive, manipulative, or illegal
   control over their followers’ lives. In addition to these usages,
   Christians generally have a doctrinal component to their use of the word.
   Cult in this sense, is a counterfeit or serious deviation from the
   doctrines of classical Christianity. Watchman Fellowship usually uses the
   term cult with a Christian or doctrinal definition in mind. In most cases
   the group claims to be Christian, but because of their aberrant beliefs on
   central doctrines of the faith (God, Jesus, and salvation), the
   organization is not considered by Watchman Fellowship to be part of
   orthodox, biblical Christianity. Research material and Profile are
   available. 

   Occult

   The term, “occult” comes from the Latin occultus or “hidden.” Generally
   the word is used of secret or mysterious supernatural powers or magical,
   religious rituals. The word “occult” in this publication is used to
   describe any attempt to gain supernatural power or knowledge apart from
   the God of the Bible. Generally it refers to witchcraft, satanism, 
   neo-paganism, or various forms of Psychic discernment (astrology, seances,
   palm reading, etc.). Research material available. 


   New Age
     

   New Age is a recent and developing belief system in North America
   encompassing thousands of autonomous (and sometime contradictory) beliefs,
   organizations, and events. Generally the New Age borrows its theology from
   pantheistic Eastern religions and its practices from 19th century Western
   occultism. The term “New Age” is used herein as an umbrella term to
   describe organizations which seem to exhibit one or more of the following
   beliefs: (1) All is one, all reality is part of the whole; (2) Everything
   is God and God is everything; (3) Man is God or a part of God; (4) Man
   never dies, but continues to live through reincarnation; (5) Man can
   create his own reality and/or values through transformed consciousness or
   altered states of consciousness. Research material and Profile are
   available. 


   CULT INDEX

   A

   3H0: See Healthy, Happy, and Holy. 

   7 Habits of Highly Effective People: A book by Stephen Covey. 


   Aaronic Order, Maurice Glendenning, Murry, UT: Splinter group from The
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (LDS), founded in 1942 by
   Glendenning after he was excommunicated by the LDS Church for receiving
   and publishing revelations later known as the Levitical Writings.

   Abaddon: (Hebrew for "The Destroyer"; in Greek, Apollyon) A demon
   described in the Bible as "the angel of the bottomless pit" (Revelation
   9:11). 


   Abbey of Thelema, Old Greenwich, CT: Esoteric magic, teachings of Aleister
   Crowley. 

   Abode of the Message, Pir Vilayat Inayat Khan, New Lebanon, NY: Sufism, 
   alchemy, dowsing, meditation to lead to "inner attunement," Native
   American spirituality, sweat lodge. 


   Academy for Guided Imagery, Martin L. Rossman & David E. Bresler, Mill
   Valley, CA: Healing by altered states of consciousness, imagery training
   (i.e., visualization), hypnosis and magic. 

   Academy of Religion and Psychical Research, Evanston, IL: Organization
   founded in 1956 to explore psychic occurrences and metaphysical
   experiences while evaluating the growing interest in occult phenomena in
   Christian churches. See Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship, Spiritualism,
   Divination. 


   Actualism: New Age teaching based on panentheism, according to which all
   human beings possess the divine Christ-consciousness and are united with
   the Mother-Father-Creator God. 

   Acupressure: See Acupuncture. 


   Acupuncture: Chinese system of healing using needles or hand pressure
   (acupressure) applied to certain points on the body, traditionally
   believed to balance the yin and yang energies in the body by opening
   blocked meridians (apexes in the pathways). Once the chakras (key points
   or intersections) are open, the chi, or energy, supposedly can then flow
   through the body bringing all things into harmony. While some limited
   physical effects (mostly anesthetic) can be attributed to this practice,
   these effects have scientific, physiological explanations totally
   unrelated to the mystical explanation, which derives from Taoism. See
   Holistic Health. Profile available. 

   Adams, Dennis, Mt. Shasta, CA: New Age, man is God. 


   Adelphi Organization, Dallas, TX: New Age teachings on Atlantis, karma,
   seven planes of existence. See Stelle Group. 

   Adeptco, Chuck McDonald, Omaha, NE: Yoga, crystals, reincarnation, karma
   and Kabbalah teachings. 


   Advanced Organization of Los Angeles (AOLA): Promotes Scientology
   philosophy. 

   Advanced Systems, Inc.: See Zen Master Rama. 


   Adventism: Widespread trans-denominational movement inspired by William
   Miller's prediction that Jesus' "advent" (return) would take place in
   1844. Even after the Great Disappointment (the date's failure), many
   people in the movement continued to believe. Some suggested revised
   chronologies and new dates, eventually forming groups such as the
   Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. Others, notably Hiram Edson and Ellen
   G. White, suggested that the 1844 date was accurate but that a heavenly
   (thus invisible) event had taken place. Their teachings became the basis
   of Seventh-day Adventism, which eventually spawned its own offshoots,
   including Armstrongism and the Branch Davidians. 

   Aesthetic Realism Foundation, Eli Seigel, New York: Happiness can be
   achieved through the harmony of opposites, e.g., realizing and accepting
   that the world is both beautiful and horrific (see Taoism). Educators have
   criticized the Foundation after public school teachers in New York
   introduced the philosophy into high school English, biology, and art
   courses. 


   Aetherius Society, Sir George King: Clairvoyance, karma, reincarnation,
   psychometry, Great White Brotherhood, UFOs, alchemy, occult secrets of
   Jesus, mantras. 

   Affective Education: Also called value-free, or non-directive, education.
   Influenced by the philosophy of Carl Rogers, affective education programs
   attempt to facilitate the emotional development of children in order to
   enhance the learning process, particularly focusing on self-esteem. This
   contrasts with traditional educational paradigms that focus on cognitive,
   or intellectual, practices such as reading, writing, and arithmetic.
   Affective education has become particularly influential in drug awareness
   programs for youth. 


   Agasha Temple of Wisdom, William Eisen, Los Angeles, CA: Universal
   consciousness of god, reincarnation, occult pyramidology, Ascended
   Masters. 

   Agnosticism: The claim (denied by Romans 1:18–20) that one has no
   knowledge of God or the origin of the universe. Some agnostics make the
   claim on a personal level, while allowing that such knowledge may exist
   but has never been known by themselves. Others assert that such knowledge
   cannot be had by anyone. Agnostics avoid the charge of dogmatic atheism by
   acknowledging the theoretical possibility of God’s existence. Yet
   virtually all live as if the non-existence of God was an established fact,
   and are thus practical atheists. 


   Agon Buddhism: Sect of Buddhism. Uses the Agon Sutras as scriptures. 

   Agyeman, Jaramogi Abebe: See Pan African Orthodox Christian Church. 


   Ahabah Asah Prophetic Ministries:See Gatekeepers. 

   Ahmadiyya Movement: Sect of Islam following the teachings of Ahmad
   (1835-1908), an Indian Muslim; most followers in the US are black, Indian,
   or Pakistani. 


   AION: Magic, runes, goddess worship. 

   Akashic Records: Term used in theosophy designating an alleged library
   that exists on the astral plane containing all the thoughts, actions, and
   events of mankind. Mystics, through altered states of consciousness, tune
   into this library for information. 


   Alamo Christian Foundation: Tony Alamo, leader of this group, has been
   imprisoned by authorities for alleged illegal activities. Teaches
   traditional Christianity is dead. Former followers have reported
   deplorable living conditions, mind control, and slave labor. Operates
   Music Square Church in TN, Holiness Tabernacle in Dyer, AR, and End Times
   Book is the publishing arm. 

   Alan Shawn Feinstein Association, Cranston, RI: UFOs, contactee. 


   Alchemy: In its original, literal meaning, theories and experiments
   involving the transmutation (dissolving and combining) of base metals to
   form gold though chemical and/or supernatural processes. Today, it caries
   the meaning of a mystical transformation in New Age consciousness through
   various mystical techniques. 

   Aleph: New name adopted by Japanese doomsday-cult Aum Shinri Kyo January
   18, 2000. 


   Aleph: Alliance for Jewish Renewal, Rabbi Zalman Schachter-Shalomi,
   Philadelphia, PA: Combines Chassidic Judaism, Native American
   spirituality, Eastern mysticism, A Course in Miracles, and New Age
   practices. Emphasizes combining syncretistic spirituality and psychology. 

   Aletheia Psycho-Physical Foundation, Jack Schwarz, Ashland, OR: New Age
   seminars on the inner-self, paraconsciousness, meditation and
   visualization. 


   All-One-God-Faith, Emanuel H. Bronner, Escondido, CA: Sells Dr. Bronner's
   Magic Soap, which claims to clean both body and soul. The soap is widely
   available in health-food stores. Teaches (like Process Theology) that God
   is continually recreating Himself. God desires all nations and religions
   to unite in an "All-One-God-Faith" on Spaceship Earth. This unification
   will come about through following 13 precepts and 20 directives revealed
   to Bronner by God. 

   All Souls Unitarian Church, John Wolf, Tulsa, OK: See
   Unitarian-Universalist Association for similar theological perspective. 


   All Ways Free, Madison, WI: New Age periodical. 

   Allah: Arabic, Muslim name for God; see Islam.


   Allegro, John: Wrote The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross.

   Alphabiotic New Life Center, Dallas, TX: New Age seminars on one’s divine
   being, Ramtha, yoga and channeling. 


   Alphasonic International, Los Angeles, CA: Company specializing in tapes
   with subliminal messages. 

   Altered States of Consciousness: Trances entered through hypnosis,
   meditation, drugs (including hallucinogenics), visualization, etc. State
   of being in which one allows the subconscious to take control and guide.
   May heighten one’s vulnerability to suggestion or susceptibility to
   deception. 


   Alternative Medicine: See Holistic Health. 

   Amalgamated Flying Saucer Clubs of America: See Mon-Ka Retreat…


   Ambassador University, Big Sandy, TX: Now defunct Liberal arts and
   religious institution founded by Herbert Armstrong. See Armstrongism. 

   Ambassadors For Christ, Tustin, CA: See Watchtower Bible and Tract Society
   for similar theological perspective. 


   Ameba, San Francisco, CA: Paganism, promotes the teachings of Aleister
   Crowley, Celtic rituals. 

   American Academy of Dissident Sciences, Culver City, CA: Studying a wide
   array of conspiracy theories, the Academy focuses on UFOs and the
   Illuminati. 


   American Association of Ayurvedic Medicine, Fairfield, IA: Holistic health
   association founded by Deepak Chopra while he followed the Maharishi
   Mahesh Yogi (see Ayurvedic medicine; Transcendental Meditation). 

   American Atheists, Inc., Madalyn Murray-O'Hair, Austin, TX: Advocates
   strict separation of church and state, and actively opposes Christian
   influence on society. O'Hair and two children disappeared in 1994 with a
   sizeable portion of the organization's assets. It is now believed they
   were murdered. Publishes American Atheist magazine. 


   American Babaji Yoga Sangam, New York, NY: Hinduism-based philosophy,
   yoga. 

   American Constitution Committee: Political organization of the Unification
   Church. 


   American Fellowship Services: Splinter group of  The Way International. 

   American Foundation for the Science of Creative Intelligence: A branch of
   Transcendental Meditation. 


   American Gnostic Church, Daeva Ares Animo: Paganism, Kabbalah rituals,
   Egyptian magic, Satanism rituals of Anton LaVey, Gnostic Mass. 

   American Holistic Nurses Association, Amherst, MA: Trains medical nurses
   to use therapeutic touch and meditation with patients. 


   American Imagery Institute, Milwaukee, WI: New Age teachings on
   visualization, astral projection. 

   American Leadership College, Inc. Osceola, IA: New Age/occult teachings on
   trance healings, mediumship, self-realization dreams. 


   American Pie and the Armageddon Bible Prophecy Home Page: The pop song
   American Pie, which prophesies the destruction of America, was foretold in
   the Song of Moses in Deuteronomy 32. See Apocalypse. 

   American Society for Psychical Research, Simon Newcomb, New York, NY: ESP,
   out-of-body experiences, mediums, parapsychology, psychokinesis. 


   American Study Group, UT: Defunct splinter group from The Church of Jesus
   Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS) that used the Book of Mormon and the
   teachings of LDS leaders to speculate on end-time events. 

   American Temple, Michael Whitney, Portland, OR: A "fourth wave" esoteric
   and mystical order led by "Patriarch" Michael Whitney reviving the
   doctrines of the now defunct Holy Order of MANS. 


   American West Publishers, Tehachapi, CA: UFOs, cosmic laws of balance.
   Publishes the Phoenix Journal. 

   American Zen Center: Zen Buddhism, shamanism, Sufism. 


   AMOM: See Ancient Mystic Order of Malchizedek. 

   AMOOKOS: Occult, magic, some Hinduism, man is already a master. 


   AMORC: See Rosicrucian Order. 
   Ananda Marga, Denver, CO: Philosophy and deities of Hinduism, teaches
   meditation and yoga. 


   Anchor of Golden Light, Dorothy and Henry Leon, Grants Pass, OR: UFOs, 
   Ascended Masters, Kabbalah mysticism, alchemy, numerology. Publishes the
   Anchor of Golden Light newsletter. 

   Ancient Mystic Order of Malchizedek, Malachi Z. York, Eatonton, GA: Also
   known as AMOM, Nuwaubians, the Nubian Nation of Moors, Right Knowledge. A
   UFO group whose leader, (a.k.a. Dwight York) claims to be form the 19th
   galaxy, called Illyuwn. A 1993 FBI report calls the group a "front for a
   wide range of criminal activity, including arson, welfare fraud and
   extortion." York’s group has also operated under other names and
   organizations including the Nubian Islaamic [sic] Hebrew Mission, the
   Ansaaru Allah Community, (an Islamic sect with doctrines similar to Nation
   of Islam), and the Original Tents of Kedar. 


   Ancient Wisdom Connection, N. Myrtle Beach, SC: New Age channeling,
   numerology and belief in “Lord Sananda,” who is an incarnation of Jesus. 

   Angels: Supernatural, non-human beings created by God. Angels worship God
   and serve as His messengers. The angels who followed Satan and rebelled
   against God are called demons. 


   Anglo-Israelism: See British Israelism. 

   Animal Magnetism: See Mesmerism. 


   Animism: The idea that all things in the universe are inherently invested
   with a life force, soul, or mind. This belief is an important component of
   many primitive religions, the occult, and spiritism. 

   Annihilationism: Taught by most Adventist groups, including the Watchtower
   Bible and Tract Society, this doctrine denies the conscious, eternal
   punishment of the lost. Instead, humans who do not receive eternal life
   will be destroyed and cease to exist. 


   Anointed Class: See Little Flock. 

   Answers Research and Education, Bud Cocherell, San Jose, CA: Man’s destiny
   is to become a God, keep Old Testament festivals. 


   Anthropomancy: A form of divination based on psychic readings of the
   entrails of a human who has been ritualistically sacrificed. 

   Anthroposophic Society, Rudolf Steiner, Hudson, NY: Similar to the Chicago
   organization (below), possibly affiliated. 


   Anthroposophical Society, Rudolf Steiner, Chicago, IL: Occult, related to
   Theosophy; teachings on karma, meditation, Atlantis and reincarnation. 

   Apocalypse: Also called Armageddon. From the Greek word apokalypsis,
   meaning "revelation, disclosure, or unveiling," the term apocalypse refers
   in the Bible to the summation of human history through God's direct
   judgment upon the world. Central in biblical apocalyptic literature is the
   Revelation to John (sometimes called The Apocalypse). A common feature of
   many pseudo-Christian groups is their attempts to predict the date of the
   apocalypse. For examples of groups that have falsely predicted the
   apocalypse, see Church of the Living Stone Mission for the Coming Days,
   Adventism, Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. 


   Apostasy: From the Greek word apostasis, meaning "rebellion," and the
   Latin word apostasia, meaning "abandonment," the term apostasy refers to a
   renunciation of the Christian faith. The Watchtower Bible and Tract
   Society applies the label apostate to former Jehovah's Witnesses, who are
   then shunned by all Witnesses in good standing. 

   Apostle: From the Greek word apostolos, meaning "messenger," the term
   apostle refers to those leaders of the early Christian church who were
   chosen by Jesus. The criteria for being an apostle was 1) the individual
   was personally chosen by Christ; and 2) the individual must have
   personally seen Christ. Members of the top two quorums of leadership in
   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claim the title today. 


   Apostolic Churches: A branch of Pentecostalism including several
   denominations as well as independent churches with the name "Apostolic";
   many (but not all) Apostolic churches adhere to Oneness Pentecostalism. 

   Apostolic Overcoming Holiness of God, Inc., Birmingham, AL: Pentecostal
   church, stresses the oneness of God while accepting the Triune Being of
   the Godhead. Salvation depends upon baptism, tarrying to receive the Holy
   Spirit, and holiness. Publishes The People's Mouthpiece magazine. 


   Apostolic United Brethren: See Corporation of the Presiding Elder of the
   Apostolic United Brethren. 

   Applewhite, Marshall: See Heaven’s Gate. 


   Applied Kinesiology: New Age diagnostic technique sometimes called “muscle
   testing.” Often patients hold health care products (vitamins, herbs, etc)
   in their hand while the practitioner pulls or “tests” the reciprocal
   strength in the finger, arm, etc. to determine the effectiveness or dosage
   of the remedy. See Holistic Health. 

   Aquarian Academy, Robert E. Birdsong, Eureka, CA: Jesus only an avatar of
   the Cosmic Christ, of the Great White Brotherhood of Light. Man’s purpose
   is to reach the transcendental plane, release from the wheel of fate,
   astral projection, meditation, cosmic truths. 


   Aquarian Age Teaching, Ruby Focus, Sedona, AZ: Discover the God within,
   the Father-Mother god, Atlantis, Christ-consciousness. 

   Aquarian Church of Universal Service, Paul Shockley, Portland, OR: Teaches
   cosmic awareness but with no specific doctrine. Similar to
   Unitarian-Universalist. 


   The Aquarian Conspiracy, Marilyn Ferguson: A book documenting and
   advocating the widespread growth of the New Age movement. 

   Aquarian Educational Group, Torkom Saraydarian, Sedona, AZ: Astrology,
   moon festivals, use the Bhagavad-Gita, Jesus only an avatar. Publishes the
   Fiery Synthesis magazine. 


   Aquarian Foundation, Keith Milton Rhinehart, Seattle, WA: Universalism, 
   yoga, spiritism, Theosophy-based philosophy. 

   Aquarian Gospel of Jesus Christ: Book written by Levi H. Dowling, a New
   Age, apocryphal story supposedly based on the Akashic Records. 


   Aquarian Minyan, Berkeley, CA: Jewish group, yoga, mysticism. 

   Aquarian Perspectives Inter Planetary Mission, Montgomery, AL: UFO group,
   receives messages from Futron and the Rainbow Star Legionnaires. 


   Aquarian Tabernacle Church, Index, WA: Paganism, worship of Mother Earth,
   goddess worship, sun and moon festival, magic. Publishes the Panegyria
   newsletter. 

   Arcana Workshop, Manhattan Beach, CA: Meditation, Great Invocation, moon
   festivals. Based on the teachings of Alice Bailey (see Arcane School).
   Publishes the Thoughtline newsletter. 


   Arcane School, Alice Bailey: Occult, esoteric teachings, connected with
   Lucis Trust, formerly Lucifer Trust. Similar to Theosophy. 

   Arefu: Company created and owned by Japanese doomsday-cult Aum Shinri Kyo
   for real estate brokering, financing and seminars. On January 18, 2000,
   the cult announced it was also changing its own name to Arefu (Aleph, in
   English). 


   Arete Truth Center, Paul Lachlan Peck, Las Vegas, NV: New Age,
   metaphysics, teaches balancing the body, mind and spirit. 

   Arguelles, Jose: New Ager who staged the Harmonic Convergence. 


   Arizona Light, Phoenix, AZ: New Age periodical. 

   Arizona Metaphysical Society, Frank Alper, Phoenix, AZ: New Age seminars
   on rebirthing, astral projection, channeling, karma, reincarnation, and
   crystals. 


   Arizona Network News, Scottsdale, AZ: New Age periodical. 

   Arm of the Lord, Warren, OH: Teaches that it is a satanic idea to invite 
   Jesus into “one’s life.” 


   Armageddon Time Ark Base Operation, O.T. Nodrog, Weslaco, TX: UFO group,
   channels messages from outer dimensional forces. 

   Armstrong, Garner Ted: Son of Herbert W. Armstrong who formed his own
   rival Armstrongism splinter group, the Garner Ted Armstrong Evangelistic
   Association. See Church of God, International. 


   Armstrong, Herbert W.: See Armstrongism, Worldwide Church of God. 

   Armstrongism: The doctrines and religious movement originating with
   Herbert W. Armstrong (1892-1986), who founded the Worldwide Church of God
   (WCG). Armstrong rejected such essential doctrines of evangelical
   Christianity as the Trinity, the full deity of Jesus Christ, and the
   personality of the Holy Spirit. Armstrong taught British Israelism and
   believed that worthy humans could eventually “become God as God is God.”
   Teaches salvation by works predicated on Sabbatarianism, tithing (20-30%),
   and keeping the Old Testament feast days and dietary laws. Under the
   leadership of Armstrong’s successors, Joseph W. Tkach and his son Joe
   Tkach, the WCG has undergone a radical doctrinal transformation. Scores of
   splinter groups, such as the Global Church of God and the United Church of
   God, continue to teach various forms of Armstrongism. 


   Arn Draiocht Fein, P.E.I. Bonewits, Nyack, NY: Paganism, Druids,
   polytheism, nature worship. Publishes News from the Mother Grove
   newsletter. 

   Aromatherapy: Holistic health practice of seeking to heal certain diseases
   or illnesses by inhaling scented steam or fragrances. 


   Aromatherapy Seminars, Los Angeles, CA: Holistic Healing therapy, oils
   healing the psyche. See Aromatherapy. 

   Arunachala Ashram, Bhagavan Sri Ramana: Hinduism-based philosophy, also
   called Maharshi Center, Inc. 


   Aryan Nations Church, Hayden Lake, ID: A neo-Nazi paramilitary
   organization in the Christian Identity movement that preaches against all
   non-Caucasian groups. The Order, an Aryan Nations break-off group, killed
   Alan Berg, a Jewish radio personality in Denver, in 1984. The Aryan
   Nations received national notice in 1992 when the wife of member Randy
   Weaver was killed in a shootout with the FBI in Ruby Ridge, ID. 

   As It Is: See Process Church of the Final Judgement. 


   Asatru Free Assembly, Denair, CA: Paganism, worships Odin as Father-god,
   Frigga as Mother-god and Nerthus as Mother-Earth. Publishes The Runestone
   newsletter. 

   Ascended Master Teaching Foundation, Mt. Shasta, CA: Occult, part of the I
   AM movement, Great White Brotherhood, similar to Theosophy. 


   Ascended Masters: Sometimes called the Great White Brotherhood. Occult,
   New Age belief in alleged teachers or masters who live on an astral plane
   as non-physical entities beyond time and space. They can supposedly
   communicate spiritual truths to humans through channeling or other occult
   techniques. Membership includes Jesus, Buddha, St. Germain (see I AM
   movement), Ramtha (see Knight, J. Z.), Mafu (see Torres, Penny), Seth (see
   Roberts, Jane), and others. 

   Ascended Masters School of Light, Toni Moltzan, Carrollton, TX: New Age,
   channeling, Ascended Masters including Jesus, universal consciousness. 


   Ascension Week Enterprises, Santa Fe, NM: New Age, Channeling, reaching
   out to children with New Age programs. 

   ASCENT Foundation, Larry Jensen, Sedona, AZ: New Age enlightenment,
   similar to Silva Mind Control, est, and Lifespring. 


   Asheville Meditation Center, Asheville, NC: New Age, achieving man’s
   divine nature, transcendence. 

   Assemblies of the Called Out Ones of “Yah,” Sam Surratt, Milan, TX: Sacred
   Name movement. 


   Assemblies of Yahweh, Jacob Meyer, Bethel, PA: Publishes The Sacred Name
   Broadcaster magazine. See Sacred Name movement. 

   Assemblies of Yahweh (7th day), Cisco, TX: See Sacred Name movement. 


   Assembly of Scientific Astrologers, George Cardinal, LeGrosoplin, MO: 
   Esoteric astrology, karma and reincarnation. 

   Assembly of Yahweh, Holt, MI: Founded in 1930, perhaps the oldest of the
   Sacred Name groups in America. Sabbatarianism. Publishes The Faith. 


   Assembly of YHW Yoshua, Pueblo, CO: Sacred Name movement. 

   Associated Readers of Tarot International, Carbondale, IL: Tarot form of
   divination, Celtic rituals. 


   Associates for Scriptural Knowledge, Ernest L. Martin, Portland, OR:
   Anti-denominational group whose Associates study doctrine through a Home
   Study Course. Teaches universalism, i.e., that all people will be saved
   (although not all will experience the first resurrection and live in
   Christ’s millennial kingdom), and the Sacred Name doctrine (Martin claims
   that the name Yahweh was removed from the Bible by Jerome). Martin was
   fired by the Foundation for Biblical Research (an Armstrongism splinter
   group in Alhambra, CA) in 1984 for espousing these doctrines. Publishes a
   “restored” Bible called The Manuscript Version of the Bible, and The ASK
   Communicator.

   Association for Christian Development, Kenneth Westby Auburn, WA:
   Armstrongism splinter group. 


   Association for Past-Life Research and Therapies, Inc. Riverside, CA: New
   Age, reincarnation and astrology. 

   Association for Research and Enlightenment (A.R.E.), Edgar Cayce, Virginia
   Beach, VA: Pantheism, trance medium (or channeling), life readings,
   reincarnation. 


   Association for the Understanding of Man, Austin, TX: New Age, channeling,
   psychic reading, altered states of consciousness. 

   Association of Unity Churches: The denominational structure affiliated
   with the Unity School of Christianity. 


   Association Sananda & Sanat Kumara, Mt. Shasta, CA: New Age, channeling
   Christ-consciousness teachings. 

   Astara, Robert & Evelyn Chaney: New Age, spiritism, yoga. Publishes Voice
   of Astara. 


   Astral Projection: New Age/occult doctrine teaching methods to induce an
   out of body experience (OBE), in which one’s soul (i.e., astral body)
   departs the physical body, travels to various parts of the universe, then
   re-enters the body. Usually a “cord” is said to connect the soul and body
   at all times. Also called astral travel. 

   Astro Computing Services, San Diego, CA: Astrology. 


   Astrology: An ancient fatalistic system of divination using the position
   of the planets, moon and sun in the twelve Zodiac positions at the moment
   of one’s birth to gain occult or hidden knowledge of the future. Profile
   available. 

   Astrology and Psychic News, N. Hollywood, CA: New Age periodical. 


   Atheism: The assertion, to be taken on faith, that there is no God. Some
   atheists, such as Madalyn Murray-O'Hair, have fought to prevent any
   recognition of God in public life. See American Atheists, Inc.

   Atlantic Pagan Council: Association of East Coast pagan covens, magic,
   moon festivals, paganism. Publishes the Atlantic Pagan Council Amateur
   Publishers’ Association newsletter. 


   Atlantis: A mythical island/continent said to have sunk beneath the ocean.
   Purported to have been a highly advanced civilization. New Agers often
   claim to have recovered lost mystical wisdom and knowledge from Atlantis,
   sometimes through channeling. 

   Atman: A term used in Hinduism referring to the eternal or real self and
   sometimes refering to the principle of life in all things. 


   At-one-ment: Term used by several Mind Science or New Thought religions
   (such as Christian Science) referring to the supposed metaphysical unity
   or “oneness” of human beings and God as demonstrated by Christ. Contrast
   the Christian term “atonement,” which refers to Christ’s death on the
   cross as the means by which he reconciled sinful human beings to God. 

   Aum Shinri Kyo, Shoko Asahara, Tokyo, Japan: Aum (a mantra) Shinri Kyo
   (Supreme Truth) is the apocalyptic Buddhist sect suspected in the 1995
   subway nerve gas murders in Japan. Police raiding cult compounds
   discovered stockpiles of nerve gas and the basic ingredients of biological
   warfare. Sect leaders have been charged with abduction and "murder
   preparation." Aum leader, Chizuo Matsumoto (now called Shoko Asahara),
   predicted the end of the world between 1997 and 2000. The Dalai Lama, the
   leader of Tibetan Buddhism, has denied Aum claims that Asahara was ever
   his disciple. The sect has about $29 million in assets and 10,000
   disciples in Japan and 30,000 in Russia. The sect has followers in other
   countries including the U.S. and Australia. On January 18, 2000, the cult
   announced it was changing its name to Arefu (Aleph, in English). Profile
   available. 


   Aum Supreme Truth: See Aum Shinri Kyo. 

   Aura: A subtle light or energy field said to surround people or objects.
   Mystics explain that from the color of the aura, a person’s emotional and
   intellectual moods can be determined. 


   Author Services, Inc.: Promotes Scientology philosophy. 

   Automatic Writing: Inspired from the spirit world, the writer has no
   conscious muscular control of his hands or arms. Found in many occult and
   New Age groups. 


   Avanta Network, Palo Alto, CA: New Age, works by Virginia Satir promoted,
   positive and negative energies. 

   Avatar: Hindu concept of an earthly manifestation of one of the gods in
   human or animal form, e.g., Krishna is an avatar of Vishnu. 


   Avatar, Flagstaff, AZ: New Age seminars similar to est and Lifespring,
   enables participant to have conscious shift of beliefs. 

   Awake!: Magazine published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. 
   Awareness Research Foundation, Inc., North Miami, FL: Astrology, Atlantis,
   UFOs, ESP and Lord Sananda. 

   Ayurvedic Lifestyle Center, Pearl Miller, Reno, NV: Eastern mysticism, 
   meditation, homeopathy. 


   Ayurvedic Medicine: Promoted by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and Deepak Chopra.
   Teaches the balancing of vibrational centers for health through diet,
   exercise, herbs, and purification procedures.


   B
   Baba, Sai: Indian guru, Hinduism, meditation, Kundalini yoga. 


   Bahá’í Faith,The, Bahá‘u’lláh: A sect of Islam evolving into a major
   independent religion with approximately five million believers worldwide.
   Buddha, Jesus, Muhammad, Bahá‘u’lláh and others are viewed as a succession
   of divine messengers. A 19th century Persian teacher, the Báb, (or “Gate”)
   predicted Bahá'u'lláh's coming. Bahá’í advocates a new global order of
   sexual equality, a one-world economic system to eliminate poverty, and a
   one-world religion. Profile available. 

   Bailey, Alice: Founder of the Arcane School. Profile available. 


   Baphomet: The Goat God, also called the Sabbath Goat, the Great God Pan,
   Abraxas, Thanateros, or the Horned God. Often used as a symbol of Satan,
   especially in Satanism, and depicted as a Goat’s Head symbol, an upside
   down five-pointed star (cf. pentagram), or a man with horns and goat-legs.

   Baptism for the Dead: Practice of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
   Saints (LDS) whereby living members are baptized by proxy for people who
   have died without knowing the LDS Gospel. If these dead persons then
   accept the LDS gospel while in Spirit Prison, they can potentially attain
   full salvation or godhood (exaltation). This ceremony is performed only in
   an LDS Temple. See Baptismal Regeneration. 


   Baptismal Regeneration: The belief that regeneration (i.e., the new
   birth), and therefore salvation or eternal life, is conditioned upon water
   baptism. Most groups teaching this doctrine also add that proper mode
   (immersion or sprinkling) and/or proper minister (one authorized by the
   organization) is necessary. All Christians should be baptized (Matthew
   28:19). The teaching that baptism is a prerequisite for salvation,
   however, is considered by many evangelicals to be a heretical compromise
   of the biblical gospel of salvation by grace alone (Ephesians 2:8-10). The
   extreme version of baptismal regeneration, which denies the salvation even
   of baptized Christians outside some particular church group, is clearly
   heretical. See Salvation by Works, Salvation by Grace, Gospel. 

   Bear Tribe Medicine Society, Spokane, WA: Native American spirituality,
   Mother Earth, medicine wheel, moon ceremonies. 


   The Beatles: A highly influential rock-and-roll group from the 1960s. In
   1966 they became involved in Transcendental Meditation; later both John
   Lennon and George Harrison repudiated TM. Harrison then became a devotee
   of ISKCON and recorded his hit single “My Sweet Lord” as a devotion to
   Lord Krishna. The Beatles are widely credited with increasing the
   popularity of Eastern religions in the United States. 

   Believers International, Tucson, AZ: Compiling a compendium of all of
   William Branham's teachings. Publishes Believer’s News. 


   Bell, Art: Popular late-night radio talk show host. While his Coast to
   Coast weeknight broadcast and Dreamland weekend broadcast focus on a wide
   array of New Age and occult issues, as well as many conspiracy theories,
   one of the most common subjects discussed by guests on the program is
   UFOs. 

   Beltane: Occult, Celtic holiday, also called Walpurgisnacht, celebrated on
   the night of April 30. Celts are alleged to have conducted fertility
   rituals and human sacrifice. 


   Bermuda Triangle: Geographically, the Triangle composes the southwestern
   quadrant of the North Atlantic, with apexes in Bermuda, Puerto Rico, and
   in the Gulf of Mexico west of Florida. Some people involved in the occult
   and UFO studies believe the Triangle is a supernaturally dangerous area,
   with many ships and airplanes disappearing in the Triangle in the 20th
   century. 

   Bernard, David: A well-known Oneness Pentecostal writer and speaker. 


   Besant, Annie: Successor to Madame Blavatsky (founder of Theosophy) who
   proclaimed Krishnamurti as the Messiah. (Krishnamurti later renounced that
   role). 

   Bet Hashem – The House of YHWH, New Haven, IN: Sacred Name, man is the
   offspring of light, conversion is the union with the light. 


   Beth El Shaddai, Dick Amos, Plano, TX: Dual Covenant doctrine, denies
   Jesus is God. 

   Beth HaShem, Jacob Hawkins, Odessa, TX: Sacred name, Sabbatarianism, keeps
   Old Testament feasts and laws for salvation. Publishes The Prophetic
   Watchman newsletter. 


   Bhagavad-Gita: Meaning “Song of the Lord,” this scripture is used in
   Hinduism and ISKCON. 

   Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh: Though this Indian guru is deceased, many
   followers still practice his unique form of Hindu philosophy and sexual
   yoga system to gain enlightenment. 


   Bhakti Yoga: Type of yoga or spiritual exercise involving devotion to a
   guru. 

   Bible: Considered scripture by Christianity. Consists of the Jewish
   scriptures (Old Testament) and the Christian scriptures (New Testament). 


   Bible Believers, Inc.: See Branham, William. 

   Bible Code, Michael Drosnin: Bestselling 1997 book teaches that prophecies
   are hidden in a complex network of letters and words within the Old
   Testament. Drosnin claims that he attempted to warn Israeli leader Yitzak
   Rabin of his impending assassination based on a prediction in the biblical
   code. The theory is a form of numerology and has some associations with
   the Jewish occultism of the Kabbalah. 


   Bible Speaks, The: Former name of Greater Grace World Outreach. 

   Bible Students: Various semiautonomous groups that broke away from the
   Watchtower Bible and Tract Society after Joseph Rutherford took control of
   the organization. Reprints the early writings of Watchtower founder
   Charles Taze Russell including Divine Plan of the Ages. Groups across the
   country go under various names (e.g., Fort Worth Bible Students, Chicago
   Bible Students, etc.). 


   Bible Talks: Home and campus group studies sponsored by the International
   Churches of Christ. 

   Bible Way Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ: Oneness Pentecostalism
   denomination. 


   Bible Way Publications, Ft. Lauderdale, FL: Bible Students group. 

   Biblical Church of God, Santa Cruz, CA: Armstrongism splinter group. 


   Biblical Research Centers: Regional centers for The Way International. 

   Bind: See Spell. 


   Bioenergy: New Age practice of healing. Balances the life-energy by
   opening blocked meridians (see acupuncture). 

   BioEnergetic Synchronization Techniques: New Age method using the body’s
   life force to heal itself. 


   Biofeedback: The use of EEG (electroencephalographic) feeback instruments
   to monitor brain waves and skin resistance with the goal of modification
   of brain waves. Participants can learn to control heart rates or generate
   brain wave activity (alpha, beta, and delta) at will to induce altered
   states of consciousness. Enhances the capacity for relaxation and/or
   inducing meditative states and physiological control similar to that in
   yoga and Zen. 

   Biointegration, Ross Algelo, Dallas, TX: New Age, body alignment, yoga,
   reflexology, rebirthing. 


   Bio-Magnetics: New Age, the realigning of magnetic fields allegedly
   surrounding the body. 

   BioPsciences Institute, Minneapolis, MN: Astrology. 


   Black Mass: A ritual in Satanism that attempts to negate or profane the
   Catholic Mass. Black candles are used and Catholic prayers recited
   backwards. Allegedly, the communion is occasionally performed using human
   blood and flesh. 

   Black Muslim: Generic term referring to Nation of Islam and related
   groups. 


   Black Christian Nationalist Movement: See Pan African Orthodox Christian
   Church. 

   Blavatsky, Madame Helena Petrovna: Founder of Theosophy. 


   Blessed Be: A common greeting used among Wiccans to invoke or wish
   happiness and well-being. 

   Blood Atonement Doctrine: The belief, taught by the second Mormon Prophet,
   Brigham Young, that for certain sins the blood of Christ will not atone
   and for which the sinner’s own blood must be shed to receive forgiveness
   (Journal of Discourses, Vol. 4, p. 53). No longer taught by The Church of
   Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the belief is often preached and
   sometimes practiced by members of Mormon Fundamentalist splinter groups.
   To this day, Utah allows condemned murders to face execution by firing
   squad rather than methods that do not shed the criminal’s blood, such as
   lethal injection or the electric chair. 


   Blue Lotus, Wilmot, WI: New Age periodical. 

   Blue Mountain Center of Meditation, Eknath Easwaran, Petaluma, CA: Hindu
   philosophy, meditation, uses the Bhagavad-Gita. 


   Blue Rose Ministry, Robert Short, Joshua Tree, CA: UFOs, messages from the
   “space brothers,” channeling. Publishes the Solar Space-Letter. 

   Blue Star, Mary Thunder, West Point, TX: New Age, sweat lodge, channeling,
   Spiritual University. 


   B’nai Noah: Dual covenant doctrine, teaches Jesus is not the Savior of the
   Jews, Gentiles are to keep the Seven Laws of Noah and study the Torah (or
   Old Testament) with Jewish Rabbis. 

   Body, Mind and Soul: Houston, TX: New Age periodical. 


   Body, Mind and Spirit: Providence, RI: New Age magazine. 

   Book of Changes: See I Ching. 


   Book of Mormon: One of the scriptures or “Standard Works” accepted by The
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other sects originating
   from Joseph Smith, including the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of
   Latter Day Saints and various Mormon Fundamentalist groups. 

   Book of Shadows: A journal for recording occult activities. 


   Bookmark, Santa Clarita, CA: Christian Science splinter group. 

   Borderland Science Research Foundation Garberville, CA: Alchemy, dowsing,
   UFOs, astrology. 


   Born Again: Biblical term used to describe regeneration (John 3:3-7). Some
   New Age followers teach that the term was Christ’s reference to
   reincarnation or rebirthing. In context, Jesus was speaking of a spiritual
   event effected by God through the Holy Spirit (see verses 6-8) to restore
   a sinful, fallen human to right relationship with Him (see verses 16-21).
   See Gospel. 

   Boston Church of Christ: See International Churches of Christ. 


   Bradshaw, John: Prominent New Age teacher on PBS and author of Healing the
   Inner Child.

   Brahma: The creator and first member of the triad of demigods in Hinduism,
   including Shiva and Vishnu. 


   Brainwashing: Forced indoctrination using various techniques to cause a
   subject to abandon basic political, social, or religious ideas or beliefs
   and replace those ideals with a contrasting belief system. A translation
   of a Chinese word xinao, “brainwashing” became a popular term to describe
   the phenomena of radical change in behavior and core beliefs that took
   place in some prisoners of war held in Chinese camps in the mid-twentieth
   century. In a more general sense, the word is sometimes used to describe
   any form of persuasion perceived to be unethical that results in a radical
   and negative change in personality. See Lifton, Robert, Mind Control. 

   Branch Davidians, Benjamin Roden: Splinter group of the Seventh Day
   Adventist Church. David Koresh (A.K.A. Vernon Howell) was leader from 1984
   to 1993. He and many of his most devout followers were killed when their
   headquarters near Waco, TX, was destroyed by fire in 1993 during a
   government raid. Taught knowledge of the Seven Seals of the Book of
   Revelation brought salvation. Many followers still believe Koresh’s
   messianic claims and expect him to be resurrected soon. 


   Branham, William, (1909-1965): Oneness Pentecostal preacher who claimed he
   received healing and prophetic powers from an angel. Denied the Trinity,
   taught the serpent seed doctrine, and rejected other Pentecostal and
   traditional Christian churches. “Branhamism” is still taught at the
   Branham Tabernacle in Jeffersonville, IN, and in many other places around
   the world. Profile available. 

   Brethren, Jim Roberts: Also known as “the Garbage Eaters,” the group
   follows the teachings of “Brother Evangelist” Roberts. The group requires
   renouncing both family and worldly possessions in order to earn salvation
   (see Salvation by works). Members travel nomadically, earning their
   nickname because of their practice of eating discarded food. Family
   members note that Roberts hides relatives, moving the individuals to avoid
   familial contact. Note: This group is not affiliated with the Church of
   the Brethren, an Anabaptist denomination. 


   Brinkley, Dannion: As chronicled in his bestseller Saved by the Light,
   Brinkley allegedly underwent a near-death experience after being struck by
   lightning. He teaches people to perform “life reviews” to enhance their
   perception of life and death and to find their life missions. He operates
   a hospice organization called Compassion in Action / The Twilight Brigade.

   British Israelism: (Anglo-Israelism/Israelitism) The doctrine that the
   true identity of modern Israel (or the “ten lost tribes”) is Britian and
   (sometimes) the British colonies (America). The monarchs of England sit on
   the throne of David. In more extreme forms, Israel is identified with a
   particular race—usually white Anglo-Saxon, Germanic, and Scandinavian
   people. Opposing versions of doctrine teach that Blacks are God’s Chosen
   People, Israel. See Christian Identity Movement, Serpent seed doctrine. 


   Brotherhood and Order of the Pleroma, Richard Duc de Palatine, Sherman
   Oaks, CA: New Age revival of Gnosticism, God and man are the same being. 

   Brotherhood of Eternal Truth, New Albany, IN: Spiritualism, astrology,
   Atlantis, channeling, magic, past life regression. Also known as Center of
   Light and Life. 


   Brotherhood of Seth, Ellsworth, ME: Paganism, homosexual or homophilic
   magic, teachings of Aleister Crowley. 

   Brotherhood of the Followers of the Present Jesus, Ann and Peter Meyer,
   San Diego, CA: Alchemy, Christ-consciousness in each person, channeling
   and clairvoyance. 


   Brotherhood of the White Temple, Inc., M. Doreal, Castle Rock, CO: New 
   Age/occult metaphysical teachings, soul illumination, three planes of
   existence. 

   The Bruderhof Community: A communal society started in Germany in the
   1920s and based on the sixteenth-century Moravian Anabaptist sect of Jacob
   Hutter, which was part of the Radical Reformation. The group is also
   called the Society of Brothers and the Hutterian Brethren. The basic
   theology of the group is Protestant but, according to former members and
   other critics, the group exercises inappropriate control over the members
   and practices shunning and other forms of spiritual abuse. 


   Buddha: Siddhartha Gautama Buddha (“enlightened one”) was born about 560
   BC in northeastern India and, according to legend, received spiritual
   enlightenment through meditation. During his lifetime, his spiritual
   insights and teachings became a major alternative to Hinduism throughout
   India. Diverse versions of his teachings can be found worldwide today. See
   Buddhism. 

   Buddha’s Universal Church, San Francisco, CA: Similar to Buddhism in
   theology. 


   Buddhism: World religion based on the spiritual teachings of Siddhartha
   Gautama Buddha. There are a number of versions or sects of Buddhism
   generally teaching paths to Nirvana (enlightenment or bliss) though the
   four noble truths (recognizing existence and source of suffering) and the
   eightfold path (correct understanding, behavior and meditation). Some
   variations of Buddhism include traditional Theravada schools of India,
   Mahayana Buddhism, which became very popular in China and Japan, and
   Tibetan Buddhism (Lamaism) in Tibet. Two more recent forms that have had
   great influence in America are Zen and Nichiren Shoshu Buddhism. 

   Builders, Norman Paulsen, Oasis, NV: New Age, Christ-consciousness,
   meditation, Father-Mother God, enlightenment. 


   Builders of the Adytum, Paul Foster Case, Los Angeles, CA: Occult, 
   Kabbalah, Tarot, spiritual alchemy, esoteric astrology. 

   Burning Man Festival, Black Rock Desert, NV: An annual festival
   celebrating neo-paganism and Satanism. The name comes from the culmination
   of the festival, in which a wooden man with outstretched arms (resembling
   a crucifix) is burned by the crowd. 


   Buzzworm: New Age/environmental periodical. 


   C
   C.O.B.U.: See Church of Bible Understanding. 


   Cabalah: See Kabbalah.

   Caelum Moor, Arlington, TX: Private park (now closed) containing menhirs
   (large upright stones) similar to those found at Stonehenge. Newspaper
   reports claim trespassers have used the site for pagan ceremonies. See
   Stonehenge. 


   Campbell, Joseph: Best known for his book and PBS series with Bill Moyers,
   The Power of Myth, which teaches all religions are based on common
   mythological themes, best interpreted through a New Age world view. 
   CAN: See Cult Awareness Network. 


   Canfield, Jack: New Age education author, editor of popular Chicken Soup
   books. Very influential in the public school arena. 

   Cantillation Research Foundation, John Diamond, Valley Cottage, NY: New
   Age, pantheism, All is God, All is Mother. 


   CARP: See Collegiate Association for the Research of Principles. 

   Castaneda, Carlos: New Age author of The Teachings of Don Juan series. He
   helped popularize Native American shamanism, the hallucinogenic peyote,
   and New Age occultism. 


   Castle Rising, Denver, CO: Paganism, magic, psychic impressions, moon
   festivals, crystals. Publishes the Castle Rising newsletter. 

   Catholicism: See Roman Catholicism. 


   CAUSA: Organization affiliated with the Unification Church. 

   Cayce, Edgar: See Association For Research and Enlightenment. 


   Celestine Prophecy, The: A best-selling New Age book by James Redfield
   that teaches enlightenment through the fictional “Nine Insights” contained
   in secret manuscripts written by Maya natives in the jungles of Peru. 

   Celticism, Celts: The Celts were a group of related tribes whose territory

   extended throughout Europe early in the first millennium AD, but who are
   most commonly associated with the British Isles. The Celts worshipped
   local deities (frequently associated with nature), often served by a
   priestly class of Druids. Human sacrifice was important to Druidic
   religion. Modern neo-pagans frequently claims to be Celtic, although the
   modern beliefs and practices bear little resemblance to ancient Celticism.


   Celtic Christianity: Augustine of Canterbury evangelized England in the
   late 6th – early 7th centuries. His work was later taken by Patrick to
   Ireland, who is largely credited with establishing the Celtic church.
   Celtic Christianity was heavily influenced by the Roman Catholic Church,
   to which it was allied, although many individuals claim a greater
   reverence for nature in the Celtic tradition. Differences in practice
   within the Celtic church were gradually eradicated during the Middle Ages
   as the Roman papacy asserted its authority over Ireland. Modern groups
   that claim to revive Celtic Christianity are frequently a mixture of
   Protestantism and Roman Catholicism, with few legitimate ties to the early
   Celtic church. Nonetheless, these groups should not be confused with
   neo-pagan groups that also claim to be Celtic. 

   Center for Action and Contemplation, Albuquerque, NM: Yoga, Enneagram
   workshops. 


   Center for Advanced Communication and Training, Carrollton, TX: New Age,
   hypnosis, Neuro-Linguistic Programming. 

   Center for Alternate Realities, Durango, CO: Metaphysics, crystals,
   shamanism, runes, Tarot Cards, guided meditation, palm reading. 


   Center for Personal and Planetary Empowerment, Austin, TX: New Age,
   meditation, alchemy. 

   Center For Spiritual Awareness, Roy Eugene Davis, Lakemont, GA: New Age,
   enlightenment, man’s higher self, cosmic-consciousness. 


   Center for Studies on New Religions, Massimo Introvigne, Torino, Italy:
   Introvigne studies new and alternative religious groups. He and his work,
   which is frequently supportive of new religions, are often used by
   alternative religious groups to support their activities when pursuing
   governmental recognition. 

   Center for Wisdom Spirituality, Paradise, PA: Universalism. Publishes the
   Interconnections newsletter. 


   Center for World Networking, Soguel, CA: UFO, psychic, yoga, Universal
   Energy. 

   Center of the Light, Great Barrington, MA: New Age, Native American
   religions, reflexology. Publishes The Light Journal. 


   The Centers Network: See est. 

   Centre de Recherche sur l’Energie Humaine Universelle (CREHU): See
   Spiritual Human Yoga. 


   Centric, Houston, TX: New Age periodical. 

   Cesar, San Antonio, TX: Assistant to Papa Jim. Occult spells, hexes,
   curses, voodoo, witchcraft (see Wicca). 


   Chakras: New Age, said to be centers for cosmic energy in the human body
   that are aligned to allow the Kundalini energy to proceed from the base of
   the spine to the top of the forehead. 

   Champaign-Urbana Church of Christ: Member, International Churches of
   Christ. 


   Channeling: New Age term for the occult practice of Spiritualism (also
   called trance channeling). Spirit beings, Ascended Masters, deceased
   humans, familiar spirits, or animal spirits allegedly communicate
   important messages by temporarily entering the body and controlling the
   voice of a host (channel or medium). Most channelers give the same basic
   message, that man is a God. Profile available. 

   Chapel of Prayer, Eleanor Button, Houston, TX: Psychic readings,
   channeling, crystals, astrology, self-healing meditation. 


   Cheetham, John: See Great Lakes Society for Biblical Research. 

   Chen Tao, Hon-ming Chen (The Right Way, God's Salvation Church, God Saves
   the Earth Flying Saucer Foundation): Apocalyptic Taiwanese UFO group that
   drew international media attention when they predicted that God would
   descend to their Garland, TX, headquarters in a flying saucer on March 31,
   1998. Publishes Practical Evidence and Study of the World of God and
   Buddha, God's Descending in Clouds (Flying Saucers) on Earth to Save
   People. Profile available. 


   Chi: Invisible energy or force alleged to make up the universe and flow
   through all living things via meridians or chakras. See Taoism, Yin and
   Yang, Acupuncture. 

   Chicago Bible Students, Chicago, IL: Largest and best known of the
   independent "Bible student" groups. Reprints the early writings of
   Watchtower Bible and Tract Society founder Charles Taze Russell, including
   Divine Plan of the Ages.


   Children of God: See The Family (Children of God). 

   Chinmaya International Foundation, Swami Chinmayananda, Piercy, CA:
   Eastern mysticism, yoga, meditation. Publishes the MU News. 


   Chinmoy, Sri: Hindu philosophy, meditation. 

   Chinook Learning Center, Fritz and Vivienne Hull, Clinton, WA: Native
   American Earth-Spirit philosophy, shamanism, meditation, called one of the
   most important New Age centers. 


   Chiromancy: See Palm Reading. 

   Chiropractic Medicine: A holistic health practice whereby practitioners
   use a form of manipulative therapy to treat musculoskeletal problems.
   While many chiropractors are not engaging in alternative religious
   activities via their practice, critics claim that some chiropractors
   engage in chiropractic medicine in accordance with the Taoist principle of
   facilitating the flow of chi. 


   Choice Experience, A, Jerry Stocking, Chetek, WI: New Age,
   Neuro-Linguistic Programming, “other-than-consciousness” techniques. 

   Choosing Light, Mill Valley, CA: New Age, meditation, telepathic
   communication from Higher Dimension Guides and teachers. 


   Chopra, Deepak: Noted  New Age and health author and lecturer. See
   Ayurvedic Medicine. Profile available. 

   Christ: Based on the Greek christos meaning “anointed one,” equivalent to
   the Hebrew “messiah.” Generally used in the Old Testament of one who has
   been anointed with oil and/or set apart for a specific mission, as was
   David, the king of Israel (see 1 Sam. 16:13). Specifically used to speak
   of the promised messiah/savior of Israel and the world. Christians believe
   this to be Jesus of Nazareth, who died to atone for human sin. Other
   religions believe in a succession of Christ figures through history,
   sometimes including Jesus, who were great teachers. New Age groups
   sometimes understand the term “Christ” as a reference to the deity found
   in all humanity (the Cosmic Christ). Thus, Jesus was conscious of his
   deity or “the Christ within” and others can have this same 
   “Christ-consciousness” by realizing that they, too, are divine. Other
   religious leaders have historically claimed to hold the office or ministry
   of Christ including Unification Church founder Rev. Sun Myung Moon.
   Biblical warnings are given for “false Christs” (Mark 13:22). Scripture
   also speaks of an antichrist and of antichrists who stand against and/or
   instead of the true Christ (1 John 2:18). 


   Christ Cathedral for Divine Abundance, Alexius Bassey, London:
   Universalism, Divine Consciousness. 

   Christ-consciousness: New Age term expressing the belief that Christ is a
   divine potential in all human beings of which only some people are aware
   or conscious, rather than a unique title for Jesus. 


   Christ Family, Charles McHugh: McHugh, a.k.a. Lightening Amen, claims to
   be the incarnation of Jesus. Followers dress in robes, no shoes, practice
   vegetarianism. 

   Christ Light Community: See New Age Church of Truth. 


   Christ the Savior Brotherhood: See Holy Order of MANS. 

   Christadelphianism, John Thomas: Teaches that Jesus is a created being,
   Holy Spirit is Power of God, and salvation by works. Also rejects the
   ideas of heaven and hell. It has several splinter groups. 


   Christian Community: Based on teachings of Rudolf Steiner, founder of the
   Anthroposophical Society. 

   Christian Fellowship, The: See Potter’s House. 


   Christian Foundation, Canyon County, CA: See Alamo Christian Foundation. 

   Christian Identity movement: The belief that the true identity of the ten
   lost tribes of Israel is the white, Anglo-Saxon race. The belief is
   similar to but distinct from the doctrine of British Israelism. A number
   of independent churches and organizations (including some militant racist
   groups) make up the general movement. Most deny the Trinity. Some teach a
   form of the Serpent Seed doctrine, believing that Jews are descendants of
   Eve’s alleged sexual relations with the serpent (Genesis 3) and are thus
   not fully human. Many also hold that non-Whites are descended from the
   union of Cain and a woman from a supposed pre-Adamite race. Profile
   available. 


   Christian Millennial Fellowship, Hartford, CT: Watchtower Bible and Tract
   Society splinter group (see Bible Students). Publishes The New Creation
   periodical. 

   Christian Prayer Center, Mother Martin, Washington, D.C.: Native American
   spirituality and rituals, voodoo. 


   Christian Renewal Ministry, Saratoga, CA: Watchtower Bible and Tract
   Society splinter group (see Bible Students). 

   Christian Rose Cross Church, Olympia, WA: Based on the teachings of Max
   Heindel (see Rosicrucian Fellowhip), Cosmic Christ, Universal religion. 


   Christian Science, Mary Baker Eddy, Boston, MA: Officially called Church
   of Christ, Scientist. Eddy’s teaching heavily indebted to Phineas P.
   Quimby, a mesmerist. Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures
   functions as a virtual second canon of Scripture. Views God as infinite
   Mind, “the animating divine Principle of all that is real and good.”
   Matter is unreal; thus, so are sickness and death, which are overcome by
   believing that we are Mind. Seeking medical help is discouraged,
   frequently resulting in preventable deaths. Christ is “the divine
   manifestation of God” most fully seen in Jesus, who only seemed to die.
   The “Holy Ghost” is Divine Science, that is, Christian Science. The
   orthodox doctrine of the Trinity is rejected as polytheistic. Many New Age
   ideas have historical roots in Christian Science and related Mind Science
   groups. Profile available. 

   Christianity, Jesus Christ: Major world religion developed in the first
   century AD based on the belief that Jesus of Nazareth was the promised
   Messiah or Christ of Israel. Followers, called Christians, were initially
   viewed as a sect of Judaism. It quickly developed as a separate religion
   as Jewish Christians became outnumbered by non-Jewish converts and,
   through a strong missionary emphasis, Christianity became a diverse
   worldwide movement. Their scripture is the Bible, which contains the
   Jewish Scriptures (Old Testament) and the Christian Scriptures (New
   Testament). Except for cults, aberrant sects, and Liberal Christianity,
   those who claim to be Christians have historically believed the following:
   There is only one true God eternally revealed in three distinct Persons -
   the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (the Trinity). Human beings are sinners
   who (without the grace of God received through faith in Christ) are
   eternally lost. Jesus, who is God in the flesh, died on the cross and rose
   physically from the dead as the sole and sufficient payment for the sins
   of humanity. See Gospel, Born Again, Fundamental Christianity, Evangelical
   Christianity, Protestant Christianity, Orthodox Christianity, Roman
   Catholicism, Salvation by Grace, Salvation by Works. 


   Christward Ministry, Escondido, CA: New Age, guided meditation,
   Christ-consciousness. 

   Chrysalis: Swedenborg Foundation periodical. 


   Chuang-tzu: Legendary founder of Taoism. 

   Church, The, Jim Roberts: See Brethren. 


   Church at San Diego, Paul and Patrica Carroll: Current leaders Vincent and
   Patricia Izacic (a.k.a. Xavier). Shepherding, mind control. 

   Church For Positive Living, Dean Davis Bedford, TX: Native American
   spirituality, yoga, creative meditation, visualization. 


   Church in York, Bernard Haygood, York, PA: Shepherding, baptismal
   regeneration. 

   Church of All Worlds, Otter Zell, Berkeley, CA: Occult/Pagan theology.
   Publishes the Green Egg periodical. 


   Church of Bible Understanding (C.O.B.U.): A controversial network of
   churches, headquartered in New York, that historically has been charged
   with spiritual abuse due to legalism, undue influence, and control
   mechanisms. 

   Church of Christ: See Churches of Christ. 


   Church of Christ-Consciousness: See Center of the Light. 

   Church of Christ Jesus: See International Churches of Christ. 


   Church of Christ, Scientist: Official name for Christian Science. 

   Church of Christ, Temple Lot, Granville Hedrick, Independence, MO:
   Splinter group that broke away from the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ
   of Latter Day Saints. 


   Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, Otto Fetting, Independence, MO:
   Splinter group that broke away from the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ
   of Latter Day Saints. 

   Church of Christ with the Elijah Message, Greenwood, MO: 1998 splinter
   group from Otto Fetting's group of the same name. 


   Church of Cosmic Origin, Hope Troxell, June Lake, CA: New Age, Community,
   Cosmic Christianity, additional scripture includes The Book of Enoch. 

   Church of Divine Influence: Alignment with the Divine Will of the Wise
   Movement of the Universe. 


   Church of Essential Science, Scottsdale, AZ: Kabbalah, cosmic laws of
   Divine spark to achieve salvation, God was All in the beginning. 

   Church of E Yada di Shi-ite, Mark Probert, Mountain View, CA: New Age,
   channeling, UFO contactee. 


   Church of Freethought: A social organization for atheists that provides
   the opportunities for socializing, community service, and social support
   offered by theistic churches. 

   Church of God and True Holiness, Robert Carr, Raleigh, NC: Allegedly
   practice slavery and mind control. 


   Church of God Evangelistic Association, David J. Smith, Richardson, TX:
   Armstrongism splinter group. Denies Trinity, personality of the Holy
   Spirit, and the bodily resurrection. Teaches annihilationism, salvation by
   law-keeping, Sabbatarianism, and that man can become a member of “the God
   family” (Godhead). Publishes Newswatch Magazine and Newswatch radio and
   television programs. 

   Church of God, (Abrahamic Faith), Wenatchee, WA: Adventist group, similar
   to the Bible Students groups; rejects the Trinity, teaches
   annihilationism. Publishes Notes For Bible Students newsletter. 


   Church of God Family Counseling Center, William Miller, Dallas, TX: Miller
   claims to be the savior. 

   Church of God General Conference, Oregon, IL: Rejects the Trinity. Main
   headquarters for the Church of God, Abrahamic Faith. 


   Church of God, International, Garner Ted Armstrong, Tyler, TX:
   Armstrongism break-off group. Armstrong recently stepped down from his top
   leadership position amidst allegations of sexual misconduct and
   litigation. Publishes the International News and Twentieth Century Watch
   periodicals. 

   Church of God Philadelphia Era, David Fraser, Pasadena, CA: Armstrongism
   break-off group. Publishes the Proclaim Liberty magazine. 


   Church of God (Seventh Day), Denver, CO: One of the older Sabbatarian
   churches in America. Publishes Bible Advocate. 

   Church of God, Seventh Day, Caldwell, ID: Sabbatarianism; observes Sabbath
   and Feast days; baptism necessary for salvation (see baptismal
   regeneration). Publishes The Herald of Truth newsletter. 


   Church of God (7th Day) Salem, WV: Rejects the Trinity; teaches
   Sabbatarianism; observes Feast days and Sabbath; baptism required for
   salvation (see baptismal regeneration). Publishes The Advocate of Truth
   newsletter. 

   Church of God, The Eternal, Raymond C. Cole, Eugene, OR: Armstrongism
   splinter group; Sabbatarianism; observes Sabbath and Feast Days. 


   Church of Hakeem, Hakeem Rasheed, Oakland, CA: Teaches how the god within
   makes people rich. 

   Church of Illumination, Quartertown, PA: New Age, Divine Spark in all
   humans, Gnosticism, similar to Rosicrucianism. 


   Church of Israel, Day Gayman, Schell City, MO: Radical Christian Identity
   movement sect. Publishes The Watchman. 

   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The, Joseph Smith, Salt Lake
   City, UT: (Latter-day Saints, LDS, Mormonism) Main body of Mormonism;
   recognizes Brigham Young as Smith’s successor. Smith claimed that the
   Father and Son appeared to him and called him to restore the true Church.
   LDS Church teaches that God the Father was once a man and was exalted to
   Godhood. God (and his heavenly Wife) begat billions of spirit children,
   the firstborn of whom was Jesus. Lucifer was the leader of God’s
   rebellious spirit children. Those spirits who did not rebel become human
   beings in order to begin process potentially leading to exaltation to
   Godhood. Jesus, however, became a God while only a spirit. He organized
   our world and is Jehovah, the God of Israel. He is a separate and
   subordinate God to Elohim, the Father. A distinction is made between the
   Holy Ghost, who is a personage of Spirit, and the Holy Spirit. The latter
   is a divine energy, force, or spiritual essence that fills the universe
   and is used by all three members of the Godhead in the exercise and
   accomplishment of their will. The Church rejects the orthodox doctrine of
   the Trinity. It also redefines salvation by grace to refer simply to
   resurrection. Almost all humans will be resurrected into one of three
   kingdoms of glory, the least of which is far superior to anything known in
   this life. Entry into the higher kingdoms, and one’s rank there, depends
   not only upon the atonement of Christ, but also upon one’s good works.
   Achievement of the highest potential within the highest
   kingdom—Godhood—requires complete “obedience to all the laws and
   ordinances of the gospel.” The Bible, Book of Mormon, Pearl of Great
   Price, and Doctrine and Covenants are all considered scripture. Publishes
   Church News and Ensign magazine. Profile available. Research material
   available. 


   Church of Jesus Power, E.S. Cooke, Sr., Boulder City, NV: Astral
   projection via “Jesus Powered Sakraments” (sic) which changes man’s
   electro-magnetic polarity. 

   Church of Light, Elbert Benjamin, Los Angeles, CA: New Age, Associated
   with the ???Brotherhood of Light, rejects heaven and hell. Atonement to be
   found in each person’s own path. 


   Church of Metaphysical Christianity, Russell Flexer, Sarasota, FL: New 
   Age, Jesus is Ascended Master, Creation by Vibrations. Publishes
   Metaphysical Messenger magazine. 

   Church of Our Lord Jesus Christ Apostolic Faith: Oneness Pentecostal
   church. 


   Church of Perfect Liberty, Tokuchika Tokuhara, Glendale, CA: Zen Buddhism,
   man is manifestation of god. 

   Church of Satan, Anton Szandor LaVey, San Francisco, CA: Satanism, occult,
   incantations, festival days include Spring equinox and Halloween. LaVey,
   author of the Satanic Bible, founded the church in 1966 and died in 1997
   after which his daughter, Church of Satan High Priestess Karla LaVey,
   claimed leadership. The church has claimed as many 10,000 members. LaVey,
   a former lion tamer, organist, hypnotist, psychic, artist, and
   photographer, did not believe in a literal, personal devil, but turned to
   Satanic imagery to provoke a reaction and illustrate his disdain for
   Christianity. 


   Church of Scientology, L. Ron Hubbard: Humans are immortal spiritual
   beings whose experience extends beyond a single lifetime (reincarnation),
   and whose capabilities are unlimited, though presently imprisoned by
   matter, energy, space, and time (MEST). Salvation is the recovery of
   spiritual freedom, ability, independence and serenity, including freedom
   from the endless cycle of birth and death (reincarnation), and full
   awareness and ability independent of the body, i.e., being “able to
   control matter, energy, space, and time.” These god-like powers are
   achieved through auditing, a process whereby “engrams,” (the mental
   recordings of past moments of pain and unconsciousness), and other
   barriers to such states are removed, abilities are regained, and greater
   awareness achieved. Auditing can last for years and may cost hundreds of
   thousands of dollars. Teachings are also advanced through affiliated
   business management companies such as Sterling Management Systems, the
   drug prevention program Narcanon, and in public schools though Way to
   Happiness. The writings and recorded spoken words of L.Ron Hubbard
   (contained in over 500,000 pages of writings and over 2,000 tape-recorded
   public lectures) constitute the scripture of the religion, his book
   Dianetics, the Modern Science of Mental Health being foundational.
   Scientology publishes several magazines including Advance, High Winds, and
   Source; also several newspapers and newsletters including The Auditor,
   Tech News, KSW News and the FSM Newsletter. Scientology has a history of
   alleged abuse and illegal activities, and is fighting legal battles in
   countries all over the world. Profile available. Research material
   available. 

   Church of Seven Arrows, Wheatridge, CO: Native American spirituality,
   shamanism, paganism. Publishes Thunderbow II newsletter. 


   Church of the Brigade of Light, Charlotte, NC: Divine Mother in everyone, 
   Jesus called the Gentle Brother, Metaphysical philosophy. Publishes the
   Crystals of Light newsletter. 

   Church of the Final Judgement: See Process Church of the Final Judgement. 


   Church of the Firstborn of the Fulness of Times, The, Joel LeBaron,
   Colonia LeBaron, Chihuahua, Mexico: Polygamous, Mormon Fundamentalist
   splinter group organized in 1956 by Joel LeBaron, who was assassinated in
   1972, allegedly by his brother Ervil, who formed a rival splinter group,
   The Church of the Lamb of God. The assassination was allegedly carried out
   on the grounds of the Blood Atonement Doctrine. 

   Church of the Great God, John Ritenbaugh Charlotte, NC: Armstrongism
   break-off group. Publishes the Forerunner newsletter. 


   Church of the Lamb of God, The, Ervil LeBaron, Salt Lake City, UT:
   Polygamous, Mormon Fundamentalist splinter group formed in 1974 by Ervil
   LeBaron, who was removed from The Church of the Firstborn of the Fulness
   of Times following accusations that he was responsible for his brother’s
   assassination. The church has also been suspected in the deaths of other
   rival Mormon Fundamentalists, including Rulon Allred, founder of the
   Corporation of the Presiding Elder of the Apostolic United Brethren.
   LaBaron died in a Utah State Prison in 1981. 

   Church of the Living Stone Mission for the Coming Days, Bang-ik Ha, Seoul,
   Korea: Predicted Jesus would return on October 28, 1992. See False
   Prophecy. 


   Church of the Most High God, Marvel, TX: God the Father is male and the
   Holy Spirit is female or God the Mother. 

   Church of the Most High Goddess, Mary Ellen Tracy, Los Angeles, CA:
   Revival of Egyptian religions, temple priestess, salvation through sexual
   relations. 


   Church of the Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness (MSIA), John-Roger
   Hinkins, Santa Monica, CA: New Age, seminars, karma, reincarnation, spirit
   guide/possession, visualization, hypnosis, chanting, meditation. 

   Church of the New Birth: See Foundation Church of Divine Truth. 


   Church of the New Jerusalem: See Swedenborg Foundation. 

   Church of the Plains Indians: Native American spirituality, sweat lodge. 


   Church of the Tree of Life, San Francisco, CA: No doctrine of God, sin,
   etc., only doctrine is anything goes within legal limits. 

   Church of the Trinity, A. Stuart Otto, San Marcos, CA: New Age; By Jesus’
   C.E.R.A. (Crucifixion, Entombment, Resurrection and Ascension) he imparted
   his Consciousness into the psyche of all. 


   Church of the White Eagle Lodge, Jean LeFevre, Montgomery, TX: Divine or
   Christ light in each person, visualization, yoga, chakras, astrology.
   Publishes Newsletter for The Americas. 

   Church of Universal Love, Linda Foreman, El Paso, TX: Similar to I AM
   Movement, use teachings of St. Germain, channeling, guided meditation.
   Publishes Cosmic Channelling newsletter. 


   Church of Unlimited Devotion: Worships Jerry Garcia of the rock-and-roll
   band, The Greatful Dead. They believe Garcia’s guitar is a channel for
   God. 

   Church of Y, Tylwyth Teg, Smyrna, GA: Pagan, occult philosophy. 


   Church Universal and Triumphant (CUT), Mark Prophet, Corwin Springs, MT:
   New Age, Great White Brotherhood, God-consciousness, similar to I AM
   movement. Currently led by Elizabeth Clare Prophet. Profile available. 

   Churches of Christ: The independent Churches of Christ movement was one of
   several associations and denominations that developed from Alexander
   Campbell, Walter Scott and Barton W. Stone’s restoration movement of the
   early 19th century, which was designed to promote unity among Protestants.
   Many (but not all) Churches of Christ today, however, differ from
   traditional Protestant doctrine in two key areas. Many maintain that water
   baptism and/or other commandments (rather than salvation by grace through
   faith alone) are a requirement for salvation (see Baptismal regeneration,
   Salvation by works). Some also believe that today’s Churches of Christ are
   the only true churches on earth and that they can literally trace their
   history to the first century church in Jerusalem. 


   Circle, Madison, WI: Pagan newspaper. 

   Circle Network News Mt. Horeb, WI: Paganism, shamanism, Wicca, goddess
   worship. Publishes the Circle Network News newsletter. 


   Circle of Life, Dorothy Espiau, Houston, TX: Healing planet Earth, forces
   of Divinity, crystals, believes dolphins are alien beings. 

   Circle of Light, Dallas, TX: New Age periodical. 


   Circle of Light, Inc., Honolulu, HI: New Age, follows Lord Michael, astral
   planes, channeling. 

   City of the Sun Foundation, Columbus, NM: Channeling, chakras,
   Christ-consciousness, karma, man is part of God , man is perfect. 


   Clairvoyance: The supposed paranormal ability to “see” psychic
   information, including historical or future events or other phenomena,
   that cannot be discerned naturally through the five material senses. See
   ESP, Divination. 

   Cleage, Albert B., Jr.: See “Pan African Orthodox Christian Church”. 


   Clifford E. Hobbs Foundation, Newport, WA: Hedonistic theology. 

   Cognitive Dissonance: A mental, emotional, or psychological state which
   results from attempting to hold two totally incompatible beliefs or
   opposing attitudes at the same time. See Double Bind. 


   Cole-Whittaker, Terry: New Age guru, teachings derive from Religious
   Science. 

   College of Divine Metaphysics, Joseph Garduno, Glendora, CA: New Age,
   metaphysical teaching. 


   Collegiate Association for the Research of Principles (CARP): College and
   University outreach of Rev. Sun Myung Moon’s Unification Church. 

   Comfort Corner Church, Lawrenceville, GA: UFOs, metaphysical teachings. 


   Common Boundary, Chevy Chase, MD: New Age periodical. 

   Communion Letter, San Antonio, TX: UFO periodical. 


   Community of Jesus, Orleans, MS: Thought to be involved in shepherding and
   mind control. 

   Concept Therapy, Thurman Fleet, San Antonio, TX: New Age, stress
   management seminars, book title Rays Of The Dawn. Publishes The Beamer
   newsletter. 


   Concerned Christians, Monte Kim Miller, Denver, CO: Ironically, begun in
   the early 1980s as a Christian ministry to expose cults and false
   teaching, Miller's organization began to take on cult-like characteristics
   in later years. Becoming increasingly controversial and bizarre, Miller's
   group drew national media attention in 1998 when over 50 followers fled
   the Denver area and disappeared after Miller predicted the Apocalypse was
   to begin and that Denver was to be destroyed by an earthquake on October
   10. Miller, who claims to be one of the two end-time prophets mentioned in
   the Revelation 11, published Report from Concerned Christians and Take
   Heed Update. Produced Our Foundation radio program. Profile available. 

   Conciliation Ministries, Dusean Berkich Lawrence, KS: Conversion should be
   inward to self, not to Jesus. 


   Confraternity of Deists, Homosassa Springs, FL: Reject sin, no need for a
   Savior, no consciousness after death. 

   Confucianism, Chiu King (King Fu-tzu or Confucius - “Kung the Master”): A
   world religion based on the teachings of Chiu King who, according to
   tradition, was born in Lu, China about 550 BC Chiu King promoted peace and
   social harmony through the traditions of the ancestors. He is said to have
   collected, edited and written commentaries on four ancient manuscripts
   (including the I Ching). He also wrote Ch’un Ch’iu (“The Annals of Spring
   and Autumn”) These documents comprise the Five Classics and along with the
   Four Books (a collection of his sayings) form the basis of Confucianism.
   Doctrines include ancestor worship, devotion to family elders, and right
   conduct based on the inherent goodness of man. 


   Congregation of God, San Jose, CA: See Answers Research and Education. 

   Congregation of God Seventh Day, John Pinkston: Armstrongism break-off
   group. Publishes The Herald magazine. 


   Congregation of the Firstborn, Raymond Glenn, Grapeland, TX: Teaches that
   Jesus is not God; also sabbatarianism, festival keeping. 

   Congregation of Yahweh, Pittsburgh, PA: Sacred name group, sabbatarianism,
   Old Testament feast days and dietary laws kept, the Holy Spirit is the
   power of God. Publishes The Restoration Message newsletter. 


   Conscious Development of Body, Mind, and Soul: Organization of Teri
   Hoffman. 

   Conscious Living Foundation, Drain, OR: New Age, states of consciousness,
   visualization. Publishes the Gentle Place and Quiet Space magazine. 


   Consciousness Connection, Las Cruces, NM: New Age, visualization,
   automatic writing, rebirthing, astral projection. 

   Constellation, Elton Powers, Dallas, TX: New Age, African spirituality,
   animal spirituality, yoga for pets. 


   Contemplations, Inc., Ed Heinemann, Durango, CO: The Universe is alive and
   speaks. Life is crystalized light. 

   Continuum Foundation, Chino Valley, AZ: New Age, dynamic energies,
   consciousness raising teachings. 


   Cooneyites (Go Preachers, No Name Church, Two by Twos): Meet in homes.
   Jesus is only part human and part God. Holy Spirit empowered Jesus to live
   sinless life and can do the same for any person. Salvation by works. 

   Cornerstone, Jim Rector, Texarkana, TX: Armstrongism splinter group.
   Publishes Cornerstone. 


   Corporation of the President of the Fundamentalist Church, Rulon T. Jeffs,
   Sandy, Utah: Mormon Fundamentalist splinter group of between eight and
   twelve thousand members. The group has a strong presence in Hilldale,
   Utah, and Colorado City, Arizona (once known as Short Creek), which was
   the site of a government effort to prosecute polygamists in 1953. 

   Corporation of the Presiding Elder of the Apostolic United Brethren, Rulon
   Allred, Bluffdale, UT: Polygamous, Mormon Fundamentalist splinter group of
   between five and eight thousand members in Idaho, Nevada, Montana and the
   United Kingdom.  Allred was murdered in 1977 by members of a rival Mormon
   Fundamentalist sect. 


   Cosmerism: Mixture of Christianity and Buddhism, but embraces all
   religions as having truth. 

   Cosmic Awareness Communications, Olympia, WA: New Age, channeling the
   Force which also spoke through Jesus, Krishna and Edgar Cayce (see
   Association for Research and Enlightenment). 


   Cosmic Christ: See Christ. 

   Cosmic Communication Commune, Decorah, IA: All religions have same common
   roots, communication from the cosmic Spirit. 


   Cosmic Light of Peace Center: See House of Divine Bread. 

   Cosmic Science Research Foundation, Edward Palmer, Portland, OR: New Age,
   UFO information given by Hierarchical Intelligence on the various planes
   of consciousness. 


   Cosmic Wisdom, Clark Wilkerson, Honolulu, HI: New Age, Kabbala, psychic,
   ESP, cosmic consciousness, Universal Mind. 

   Council of Light, Honolulu, HI: Ascended Masters, similar to I AM
   movement; channeling. 


   Council of the Magickal Arts, Austin, TX: Paganism, witchcraft (see
   Wicca), goddess worship, ritual magic. 

   Course in Miracles, A, Helen Schucman: New Age book given through the
   channeled voice of “Jesus.” The world, sin, and sickness are all
   illusions. Teaches that man is still in heaven with God and this life is a
   dream. Profile available. 


   Coven: A group two or more people (ideally thirteen) practicing witchcraft
   (see Wicca) or occult arts. Also called a clan. 

   Coven Gardens, Boulder, CO: Occult, paganism, Wicca, revival of Egyptian
   deities. 


   Covered Bridge Canyon, Spanish Fork, UT: Pantheism, channeling, denies
   reality of death. 

   Covey, Stephen: Mormon author with New Age affinities. Author of the
   best-selling, 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, and several sequels. 


   Creation Calendar, Verlis W. Johnson, Kermit, TX: Sabbatarianism,
   necessity of keeping the Law, Feast Days, etc., for salvation (see
   salvation by works). 

   Creme, Benjamin: See Tara Center. 


   Crossroads Church of Christ: See International Churches of Christ. 

   Crowley, Aleister: An English magician and Occultist. Crowley (1875–1947)
   was known for sex magic, homosexual rituals, and a fascination with drugs,
   blood and torture. Headed the British branch of Ordo Templi Orientis
   (OTO), founded the Abbey of Thelema at Cefalu in Sicily. Author of Diary
   of a Drug Fiend and Magick in Theory and Practice. 


   Crusade of Innocence: Believed to be a splinter group of Process Church of
   the Final Judgment. 

   Chrysalis Foundation, Durango, CO: Metaphysical and holistic healing
   center. 


   Crystals Consciousness, Warren Klausner San Diego, CA: New Age, crystal
   healing, Kundalini, iridology. 

   Crystal Horizons, Santa Barbara, CA: New Age, crystals. 


   Crystallomancy: Divination or fortune telling by gazing into a crystal
   rock or crystal ball. 

   Crystal Pathway, Denver, CO: New Age/Occult periodical. 


   Crystals: Many though not all New Agers believe that gems (especially
   Crystals) possess mystical, esoteric, spiritual powers to bring the bearer
   health, wealth and good fortune. 

   Cult: See the Definitions section in the introduction. Profile available. 


   Cult Awareness Network (CAN): Headed by Cynthia Kisser and based in
   Chicago, IL, this was once the largest secular cult watch organization or
   anti-cult group in America. According to Kisser, between 1991 and 1996 CAN
   was the victim of approximately 50 lawsuits directly or indirectly
   sponsored by members of the Church of Scientology, an organization
   considered by CAN to be a dangerous cult. CAN eventually lost one of those
   civil suits, which resulted in CAN filing bankruptcy. On October 23, 1996,
   the Cult Awareness Network’s name, logo, and phone number were sold to a
   Scientology-related law firm as part of a $20,000 purchase of CAN assets
   in the federal bankruptcy court. Kisser warns that anyone now contacting
   CAN should be aware that they are very likely talking with Scientologists.

   Cult of Confession: One of eight criteria of Mind Control according to
   Robert Lifton’s theory of Thought Reform. A system that requires members
   to disclose to their leaders or superiors the personal thoughts,
   attitudes, and actions that do not conform to the group’s ideals. This
   practice diminishes healthy personal boundaries and privacy, and may
   facilitate additional abuses. 


   Cumorah Books, Independence, MO: Affiliated with the more conservative 
   Restoration Branches of the RLDS Church. Publishes Restoration Voice, The
   Vision.

   D


   Daily Word: A monthly publication of Unity School of Christianity. 

   Dalai Lama: The spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism. 


   Dallas Fellowship, Inc., Arlington, TX: New Age; uses The URANTIA Book as
   their main text. Publishes The Circle newsletter. 

   Dang, Luong Minh: Founder of Spiritual Human Yoga. 


   Davera Mission Church, Korea: Alternate name for Church of the Living
   Stone Mission for the Coming Days. 

   David, John: See John-David Learning Institute. 


   David, Moses (King David): Pseudonym for David Berg, the late founder of
   The Family (Children of God). 

   Davis, Haviland: Albany, NY: Leader of a Bible Students splinter group
   from the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. 


   Dawn Bible Students, East Rutherford, NJ: One of the original Bible
   Students splinter groups formed after Joseph Rutherford assumed leadership
   of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. 

   Dayspring Resources, Leonie Rosenstiel, New York, NY: Hypnosis, Reiki,
   yoga, reflexology, crystal healing. 


   de Mello, Anthony: An Indian-born Jesuit priest, who wrote a number of New
   Age books that were bestsellers in many countries. His works include One
   Minute Wisdom, One Minute Nonsense, Wellsprings: A Book of Spiritual
   Exercises, and Walking on Water. In 1998, over a decade after his death,
   the Congregation for the Doctrine of Faith (a Vatican commission)
   denounced de Mello's writings. They warned of false teachings in his
   works, including a denial of objective morality and the claim that all
   religion, including Christianity, are obstacles to truth. 

   Delphi School, Sheridan, OR: Uses the teachings of L. Ron Hubbard, founder
   of the Church of Scientology. 


   Demand for Purity: One of eight criteria of Mind Control according to
   Robert Lifton's theory of Thought Reform. An environment of blame and
   guilt based on an impossible ideal of human behavior or perfection. This
   shame-based culture punishes failure and can even subtly train members to
   punish themselves for their inability to live up to the group's ideals or
   standards. See Brainwashing. 

   Demons:Fallen angels under the direction of Satan who seek to destroy
   God’s purpose and people. Demons are invisible, spiritual beings
   (Ephesians 6:12), are organized and have supernatural power and knowledge
   (Matthew 12:24, Revelation 16:14), can possess humans and animals, (Luke
   8:2, Mark 5:13), and can inspire false doctrine (1 Timothy 4:1). 


   Denver, John: Prominent New Age singer who promoted est, Yoga,
   Transcendental Meditation, and the Windstar Foundation before his death in
   1997. 

   Deprogramming: A coercive attempt to dissuade an individual of religious
   or ideological convictions believed to be harmful, through a concentrated
   (usually two to three days) counseling procedure designed to produce a
   sudden "snapping out." Deprogramming was developed in the 1970s by Ted
   Patrick and others as a way to rescue family members who were perceived to
   have undergone negative personality change after joining destructive
   cults. Often presented as an antidote for brainwashing or mind control,
   some deprogrammers rationalized the unethical use of force and coercion to
   rescue victims by illegally holding them against their will (abduction or
   "snatching") in a process known as "involuntary" deprogramming. Watchman
   Fellowship does not support or condone such illegal and unethical
   behavior. Not to be confused with Exit Counseling. 


   Deseret Shadow Church: See Church of Essential Science. 

   Devil: See Satan. 


   Di Mambro, Joseph: See Order of the Solar Temple. 

   Dianetics: Bestselling “bible” of the Church of Scientology. 


   Discover Seminars, Irving, TX: New Age, stress management. 

   Discovery, West Valley City, UT: Anti-Christian, Jesus is the Devil. 


   Disfellowshipping: As practiced by the LDS and many other groups, this is
   a level of church discipline involving a probationary period of restricted
   privileges, but retaining church membership. As practiced by the
   Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, it is an alternate term for
   “excommunication,” being completely cut off from Jehovah’s organization;
   see Shunning. 

   Dispensing of Existence: One of eight criteria of Mind Control according
   to Robert Lifton's theory of Thought Reform. The organization's dogma
   determines whether or not other groups or individuals have the right to
   exist. All alternative belief systems or organizations are considered
   illegitimate. In extreme cases this mindset can promote violence or
   murder. 


   Divali: Hindu philosophy of Enlightenment. 

   Divination: The biblical term describing attempts to gain hidden knowledge
   supernaturally, usually about the future, apart from the God of the Bible
   (Ezekiel 21:22–25, Acts 16:16). Most often props are involved such as the
   hand (palm reading), the stars (astrology), cards (Tarot), or random
   symbols (I Ching). 


   Divine Light Center, Swami Omkarananda: Mixture of Hinduism, voodoo and
   animal sacrifice. 

   Divine Light Mission, Maharaj Ji: Hindu/New Age philosophy, teachings on
   the God within. 


   Divine Science, Denver CO: Similar to Christian Science theology: God is
   All, man is a part of the All, thus man is God. 

   Divine Science of Light and Sound, Marina del Rey, CA: New Age,
   reincarnation, karma, astral projection. 


   Divine Word Foundation, Warner Springs, CA: New Age, channeled writings,
   Jesus and Christ are separate entities. 

   Dixon, Jeane (1917–1997): Astrologer, prognosticator, claimed information
   was from Christian God, however she made many false prophecies. 


   Doctrine and Covenants: One of the scriptures or “Standard Works” of the
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; the Reorganized Church of
   Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints accepts a different version of the work
   as scripture. 

   Doctrine Over Person: One of eight criteria of Mind Control according to
   Robert Lifton's theory of Thought Reform. The ideas and doctrines of the
   leader and organization overrule the personal experiences, conscience, and
   integrity of the individual. 


   Dominion Press, San Marcos, CA: New Thought, similar to Christian Science
   and Unity School of Christianity. Publishes the Theologia 21 newsletter.
   Not to be confused with Dominion Press in Tyler, TX, a controversial but
   orthodox Christian publishing house. 

   Dorene Publishing, Arlington, TX: Occult, talismans and other pagan
   memorabilia. 


   The Door: See Potter’s House. 

   Double Bind: A mental or psychological dilemma caused when a person
   receives from a single leader or teacher conflicting messages or "truths"
   resulting in no appropriate response or answer. See Cognitive Dissonance. 


   Dowsing: Form of divination using a forked rod, a bent wire, or a
   pendulum. Used to locate people, objects, or substances, and to diagnose
   illnesses. 

   Druids: A priestly caste of the ancient Celtic people of France and the
   British Isles. They were the keepers of oral history and law, and
   officiates of pagan, occult religious practices. See Halloween. 


   Dual Covenant: The belief that the New Testament (or covenant) applies to
   gentiles (non-Jews) only. Thus, Jesus Christ is not the Savior of the
   Jewish people and they should relate to God through the earlier Old
   Testament or Abrahamic covenant. A similar doctrine called the Plural
   Covenant theory emphasizes other covenants in addition to these two major
   systems. 

   Dualism: An understanding of reality as existing in two opposite extremes.
   Metaphysical dualism sees the universe as existing in two contrary (and
   sometimes conflicting) realities—mind and matter, or spirit and physical,
   or yin and yang. Ethical dualism posits a conflict between universal good
   and an equal and opposite force of universal evil (e.g., the belief that
   God and Satan are equal and opposite beings). 


   Dungeons and Dragons: Occult, fantasy role playing game, allegedly uses
   demonic names and spells found in occult literature. Some parents have
   charged that children committed suicide under the influence of the game. 

   DuPage Church of Religious Science, Donald E. Burt, Naperville, IL: 
   Religious Science, use the teachings of Ernest Holmes. 


   Dyer, Wayne: Prominent New Age writer and spokesman focusing on business
   applications, personal transformation and motivational speaking. Also
   promotes holistic health, and Buddhism. 

   Dynamic Monarchianism: A late second-century heresy denying the Trinity,
   put forth by Theodotue of Byzantium and later adoped in modified forms by
   Paul of Samosata, Noetus and Prazeas. 


   E

   Eadie, Betty: New Age author of best-sellers, Embraced by the Light and
   The Awakening Heart. An active member of the Church of Jesus Christ of
   Latter-day Saints, Eadie claims to have died, gone to heaven, and returned
   to her body (see near-death experiences). Her books contain a combination
   of New Age and Mormon beliefs. 


   Eagle’s Cry, Denver, CO: New Age/Occult periodical, includes Egyptian
   revival, channeling, aura analysis. 

   Eagle’s Path, Grand Junction, CO: UFOs, moon festivals, yoga, rebirthing, 
   Eckankar. 


   Earth Church of Amargi, St. Louis, MO: Paganism, ritual magic, witchcraft
   (see Wicca), moon festivals, Kabbalah, goddess worship. 

   Earthmother Therapy Center: Astrology, aura reading, chakra balancing,
   channeling, homeopathy, iridology, numerology, palmistry, past life
   regression, reflexology. 


   Earthsong, Wendy Moss, Dallas, TX: Journey into Mother Earth. 

   East West Journal, Syracuse, NY: New Age periodical. 


   Eastern School Press, Talent, OR: New Age, Theosophical, karma, astral
   light. 

   Ebon, Martin: See Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship. 


   Ecclesia Athletic Association, Eldridge Broussard, Jr., Los Angeles, CA:
   Believed to practice controversial forms of mind control and shepherding. 

   Eckankar, Paul Twitchell: Mixture of pantheism and eastern mysticism,
   astral projection, reincarnation. 


   Ecstasy, Ojai, CA: New Age, man is God, realized through sexual
   encounters, New Age/Hedonism. 

   Eddy, Mary Baker: See Christian Science. 


   Edwards, Bishop Luke: See REACH, Inc. 

   Effective Learning Systems, Edina, MN: Subliminal tapes, visualization, 
   ESP, deep relaxation techniques. 


   Elmwood Institute, Fritjof Capra: Internationally recognized New Age
   author (The Tao of Physics) and lecturer. 

   Emmanuel, J. David Davis, Athens, TN: See B’nai Noah for theological
   perspective. Publishes The Gap newsletter. 


   Emerald Circle: Paganism, know the Divine within, be part of Gaia. 

   ENERGIE et PARTAGE: See Spiritual Human Yoga. 


   Enneagram: Occult symbol. A circle with its circumference divided by nine
   points; has connections with the “Tree of Life” in Kabbalah, astrology, or
   divination. 

   Epiphany Bible Students Association, Mount Dora, FL: Splinter group from
   Laymen’s Home Missionary Movement, one of the Bible Students groups that
   broke away from the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. 


   Erhard, Warner: See est. 

   Esalen Institute, Michael Murphy, Big Sur, CA: New Age, one of the
   original institutions for developing and promoting eastern mysticism/New
   Age philosophy. 


   Esoteric: Hidden or deeper knowledge held by an elite few. Belief that
   there are mystical core truths underlying /unifying religions that are
   unknown to the uninitiated. See Gnosticism, Occult. 

   Esoteric Order of Dagon, Soror Azenath 23rd, Abita Springs, LA: Channel
   the energy of the Nu Aeon, collective magical unconsciousness, worship the
   Old Ones or Old Gods. 


   ESP: Acronym for Extrasensory Perception. 

   ESPress, Inc., Washington, D.C.: Psychics. See National Spiritual Science
   Center. 


   Essene Gospel of Peace, Edmond Bordeaux Szekely: New Age, allegedly
   channeled by “Jesus,” enlightenment, illness is a mistake. 

   Essene Light Center, Mary L. Myers, Charlotte, NC: Has similarities to I
   AM movement, belief in Great White Brotherhood, ascended beings,
   Father-Mother god. 


   est, Warner Erhard: Personal transformation seminar promising individual
   growth, business management skills, stress reduction, etc. Teaches the
   world has no objective meaning, enlightenment, and to live moment to
   moment with no regard for the future. New Age themes. In the midst of
   mounting troubles, Erhard decided to leave the United States. Est was
   discontinued and replaced by The Forum. Similar to other
   transformational/encounter seminars such as Lifespring. 

   Eupsychia, Austin, TX: New Age, Transcendental Meditation, Native American
   spirituality, shamanism. 


   Evangelical Christianity: Evangelical (from the Greek euangelion, good
   news or gospel) generally means a focus on the essentials of Christianity.
   The term can be used to describe all Christians or churches that hold to
   or give heavy emphasis to specific conservative Protestant beliefs. (In
   Germany, “Evangelical” is basically synonymous with “Lutheran.”) These
   include: the authority and infallibility of the Bible, the nature of God
   (sovereign, holy, compassionate, personal, etc.), the sinful and fallen
   state of humanity, and salvation by grace through faith in the death,
   burial, and resurrection of Christ as the only means of salvation. More
   specifically the term has come to be closely identified with a widespread
   trans-denominational shift towards more conservative Christian doctrine
   that developed after World War II. See Fundamental Christianity. 

   Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above Human, Richardson, Texas: Earlier name of
   Heaven’s Gate, Marshall Applewhite's UFO cult. 


   Exaltation: In the teaching of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
   Saints, the highest form of salvation. It means to become a God, exactly
   like God the Father and Jesus Christ, and to produce and rule over one’s
   offspring throughout eternity. 

   Exit Counseling: (Thought Reform Consulting) A non-coercive technique (in
   contrast to deprogramming) designed to help rescue members of religions or
   cults that are considered false, harmful, or dangerous.  The program
   usually involves a two to three day voluntary counseling session
   emphasizing education and dialogue, often with a licensed mental health
   professional, a former member of the group, and/or a specialist on cult
   dynamics. The approach stresses true personal and religious freedom in the
   context of providing additional information and full disclosure, which
   facilitates more informed decision-making. Family counseling and
   intervention techniques may also be incorporated. 


   Extrasensory Perception (ESP): Alleged knowledge of an experience or a
   response to an external event apart from the five senses. This experience
   can take place either in a wakeful or dream state.

   F

   Faith Assembly Church, Raymond Jackson, Jeffersonville, IN: Similar to 
   William Branham. Publishes The Contender newspaper. 


   Faithbuilders Fellowship, San Diego, CA: Theology similar to Jehovah’s
   Witnesses. 

   Faithful Word, Chicago, IL: Armstrongism splinter group, teaches necessity
   of keeping the Law of Moses. Publishes The Faith Word magazine. 


   Faith Temple, Rosemary Cosby, Salt Lake City, UT: Apostolic Faith splinter
   group; Cosby has claimed to be the Messiah. 

   False Prophecy: Generally, any teaching by a prophet that is not true.
   Specifically, it is a prediction, made by an individual or group claiming
   to speak on God’s authority, of a specific event that fails to occur by
   the specific, given date or within the specified time frame (Deuteronomy
   13:1–5; 18:20–22). 


   Familiar Spirit: A spirit that can allegedly communicate with humans,
   often through possessing the body of a medium, channeler, or psychic.
   Also, a special type of demon that can impersonate a deceased person
   during attempts to communicate with the dead (see necromancy). 

   Family, The, Charles Manson: The followers of Charles Manson, some of whom
   were convicted for the 1969 Tate/LaBianca murders. Not related to the
   following entry. 


   Family, The, David Berg: Originally called the Children of God (COG) and
   recently called “The Family of Love,” this group boasts communal
   “colonies” throughout the world. Best known for explicit sexual practices
   in recruiting converts and inner-group life, based on Berg’s writings, the
   MO Letters. Not related to previous entry. Profile available. 

   Fantasy Role Playing Games (FRP): Players assume the identity of mythical
   characters and participate in elaborate mental adventures. Critics have
   expressed concern over the tremendous amount of time often invested in the
   games. More disturbing are reports that the games often emphasize rape,
   violence, spells, magic and other occult themes. Some parents have also
   charged that their children committed suicide while under the influence of
   FRP. 


   The Farm, Stephen Gaskin, Summertown, TN: Zen Buddhism mixed with esoteric
   Christianity, pantheism, communal society. 

   Farrakhan, Louis: Leader in the Nation of Islam. 


   Fate, Marion, OH: New Age/occult periodical. 

   Father Divine, né George Baker (1878–1965): Black founder of the Peace
   Mission Movement, believed by his followers to be God. 


   The Fellowship, Chicago, IL: One of a number of groups that follow the
   teachings of The URANTIA Book. New Age, automatic writing, ascended 
   beings. 

   Fellowship For Spiritual Understanding, Marcus Bach, Palos Verdes Estates,
   CA: Similar teaching to Unity School of Christianity, denies reality of
   death, teaches man is God. 


   Fellowship of Isis: Paganism. Egyptian gods and goddess worship. 

   Fellowship of the Inner Light, Paul Solomon, Virginia Beach, VA: New Age;
   concept of “Meta-Human” teaches man to go beyond human to become
   Creator/Master. 


   Fellowship of Universal Guidance, Glendale, CA: Astrology, psychic
   reading. 

   Fellowship Press, Noblesville, IN: Soulcraft library, claims of channeled
   information from William Dudley Pelley in the very High Planes of
   Consciousness after he had died. 


   Feminism: See Radical Feminism. 

   Feraferia, Eagle Rock, CA: Paganism, magic, spells, astrology, goddess
   worship. 


   Fifth Epocal Fellowship, Chicago, IL: One of a number of groups that
   follow the teachings of The URANTIA Book. Formerly URANTIA Brotherhood.
   New Age, automatic writing, ascended beings. 

   Firewalking Institute of Research and Education, Twain Harte, CA:
   Firewalking, shamanism, meditation, sweat lodge, rebirthing. 


   First Demonic Church, Efrem Del Gatto, Italy: Satanism. 

   First Presleyterian Church of Elvis the Divine, Bethelehem, PA: Begun in
   1988 as a marketing ploy/parody by Farndu and Karl Edwards, the church
   spoofs traditional religions and cults by “worshipping” Elvis Presley in
   weekly services held on the Internet and the campus chapel of Lehigh
   University in Bethlehem, PA. 


   First Temple of the Craft of W.I.C.A., South Chicago Heights, IL:
   Paganism, witchcraft (see Wicca). 

   First Universal Church of God-Realization, Bhagavan Sri
   Babajhan-Al-Kahlil, Redondo Beach, CA: New Age, God is the self within,
   many paths all lead to the One Destination. 


   First World Conclave of Light, San Diego, CA: UFOs, 32 planets already
   joined but are waiting for the Earth to make the necessary commitment
   before the spaceships can land. See also Unarius Education Foundation. 

   First Zen Institute of America, New York, NY: Zen Buddhism, astrology.
   Publishes the Zen Notes newsletter. 


   Fitch, Joseph: See Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship. 

   Flag Service Organization, Tampa, FL: Promotes Church of Scientology
   philosophy. 


   Flirty Fishing, (Ffing): Allegedly discontinued practice of using sex to
   entice converts into The Family. 

   Flying Saucer Information Center, Pasadena, MD: UFOs, aliens coming to
   take Earth children for seedlings. Publishes the Update newsletter. 


   Followers of Christ Church, Walter T. White, Oregon City, OR: Practices
   shunning, exhibits legalism, and holds to a strict faith-healing doctrine.
   Doctors and hospitals are not allowed. State medical examiner claims as
   many as 25 children have died in the last two decades from complications
   from otherwise common medical problems. 

   Ford, Arthur: See Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship. 


   Form Criticism: A method of literary criticism used by many scholars in
   the interpretation of the Bible. It identifies the literary forms of
   specific parts of the biblical writings, such as the different types of
   psalms (thanksgiving, lament, etc.) or the different units in the Gospels
   (parables, miracle stories, etc.). By noting common features in passages
   of the same form, various conclusions are drawn about how to interpret
   those passages. In liberal Christianity, which pioneered this method, many
   of the forms are assumed to be legendary or mythical (especially those
   involving the supernatural). Some evangelical scholars think form
   criticism can be useful if such liberal assumptions are avoided, while
   other evangelicals reject form criticism outright. See also Redaction
   criticism. 

   Fort Worth Bible Students, Fort Worth, TX: Bible Students group that
   republishes older Watchtower Bible and Tract Society materials. 


   Fortunetelling: A form of divination in which a person attempts to predict
   the future using alleged paranormal powers. 

   The Forum: New Age, personal transformation seminar; see est. 


   Foundation Church, New York, NY: Psychic development, “psychosomastery,”
   UFOs. See also Process Church of the Final Judgement. 

   Foundation Church of Divine Truth, Washington, D.C.: New Age/occult, based
   on automatic writings of James E. Padget as found in the book True Gospel
   Revealed Anew by Jesus; teaches that man becomes the very essence of God.
   Publishes the Divine Truth Commentary newsletter. 


   Foundation Church of the Millennium: See Process Church of the Final
   Judgement. 

   Foundation Church of the New Birth: See Foundation Church of Divine Truth.


   Foundation Faith, (Foundation Faith of God): See Process Church of the
   Final Judgement. 

   Foundation Faith of the Millennium, New York: Universalism. All religious
   leaders, including Jesus, Mohammad and Buddha were sent by God. 


   Foundation for Co-Creation, Barbara Marx Hubbard, Greenbraie, CA:
   Prominent New Age lecturer and writer. 

   Foundation for Higher Spiritual Learning, Centreville, VA: Formerly
   “Bridge to Freedom,” the new name was adopted in 1979. The group follows
   the theosophical teachings of Guy Ballard of the I AM movement, including
   the Great White Brotherhood. 


   Foundation for Inner Peace: Organization and publisher for A Course in
   Miracles. 

   Foundation for Life Action, Tara Singh, Los Angeles, CA: Know one’s own
   Christ nature; promotes A Course in Miracles. Publishes A Call To Wisdom
   newsletter. 


   Foundation for Shamanic Studies, Michael Harner, Norwalk, CT: Occult, 
   shamanism for empowerment and healing. 

   Foundation for Unlimited Consciousness, Rain Morgan, Orcas, WA: New Age,
   channeling, Ramtha devotees (see Knight, J. Z.). 


   Foundation of Human Understanding, Roy Masters, Grants Pass, OR: Eastern
   mysticism, Gnosticism, hypnotism, yoga, meditation. 

   Foundation of Light and Metaphysical Education, Hurst, TX: Occult, 
   astrology, psychic readings. 


   Foundation of Revelation, San Francisco, CA: Eastern mysticism, yoga. 

   Fox, Kate and Margarett: See Spiritualism. 


   Fox, Matthew: Dominican Catholic priest silenced by the Vatican for
   teaching blatant New Age theology (which he calls “creation-centered
   spirituality”). 

   Fraternity of Light, Philadelphia, PA: Kabbalah, reincarnation, karma;
   one’s inner essence is a Divine Spark. 


   Free Bible Students: A small Bible Students splinter group currently
   consisting of only four congregations and approximately 27 home groups. 

   Free Soul, Sedona, AZ: New Age, spirit guides, commune with Divine Nature,
   Psychic and Higher Soul Dimensions. 


   Free Spirit, Brooklyn, NY: New Age periodical. 

   Freemasonry: A fraternal order revived in the early 18th century in
   England, loosely based on associations or guilds of stone cutters
   (“operative” masons). Freemasonry (“speculative” masons) sought to give
   philosophical, moral, or spiritual meaning to the lodge, tools, and oaths
   of the stone cutters. Branches of Freemasonry include the Blue Lodge, York
   Rite, Scottish Rite, and Shriners. Affiliated organizations include the
   Order of the Eastern Star (for women), the Order of DeMolay (for boys),
   and the Order of Rainbow (for girls). Most modern adherents maintain that
   the organization is not a religion but a club or fraternity promoting high
   moral values and good works. They believe, therefore, that Freemasonry is
   compatible with and supplements Christianity and other religions. Critics
   counter that Freemasonry involves secret blood oaths or curses, and that
   the writings of respected early leaders (Albert Mackey, Albert Pike, etc.)
   are replete with occult philosophy and religious doctrine contrary to
   Christianity. Despite Freemasonry’s promotion and funding of a number of
   worthwhile, philanthropic endeavors (free Shriner children hospitals,
   nursing homes, etc.), many Christian individuals and churches have
   condemned Freemasonry or warned of elements that they believe are contrary
   to Christianity. These churches include the Presbyterian Church of
   America, Southern Baptist Convention, Episcopal Church, Christian Reformed
   Church, Church of the Nazarene, and Lutheran Church (Missouri and
   Wisconsin Synods). 


   Freewinds Relay Office, Clearwater, FL: Promotes Church of Scientology. 

   Friends Review, Hillsboro, OR: Occult/metaphysical periodical. 


   Fundamentalist Christianity: Generally a reference to conservative
   Christians who believe five “fundamentals” of Christianity: the inerrancy
   of Scripture, the virgin birth of Christ, the substitutionary atonement of
   Christ, the bodily resurrection of Christ, and the historicity of biblical
   miracles. More specifically, the term is identified with the conservative
   reaction, especially in America, to liberal Christianity in the early 20th
   century. Core beliefs of the movement are virtually identical with
   evangelical Christianity. Some fundamentalists, however, later
   distinguished themselves from evangelicals (or neo-evangelicals) whom they
   saw as too compromising and ecumenical. More recently some have given a
   new, negative meaning to the term “fundamentalist” using it as a synonym
   for narrow-minded, bigoted, anti-intellectual or divisive Christians. 

   G

   G.A.P. Ministries, Elm Grove, WI: Sabbatarianism, observes Feast Days,
   part of Sacred Name movement. Publishes The Appointed Time newsletter. 


   Gabriel Society, Ruth Harders, Western Springs, IL: New Age, metaphysics,
   Universal Mind. 

   Gaia: Originally the Greek goddess of earth. Many see the earth as one
   large living organism made of numerous parts, much as the human body is
   one living organism with various parts. 


   Gandhi Memorial Center, Swami Premananda, Washington, D.C.: Eastern 
   mysticism, teaching of Hindu leader Mahatma Gandhi. Publishes The Gandhi
   Message quarterly. 

   Garvey Center, Witchita, KS: New Age, holistic health mixed with sound
   medical procedures. Pyramid powers. 





















































































































































































































































































































































   Gatekeepers, Christopher James Turgeon, Pala, CA: A small cult formerly
   called Ahabah Sasah Prophetic Ministries in Everett, WA. Turgeon once
   claimed to be the prophet Elijah. He and another member, Blaine Alan
   Applin, were charged with first-degree murder in 1998 following the
   shooting death of former member Daniel Jess. Earlier that year a SWAT team
   served a warrant on the group's five-acre compound located 60 miles north
   of San Diego and recovered weapons and other stolen property. 


   Gateway To Light, Lloyd G. Sellman, Dewey, AZ: UFOs, telepathic
   communications. 

   Gateways Institute, Jonathan Parker, Ojai, CA: New Age, subliminal tapes,
   karma, reincarnation, hypnosis. 


   Gawain, Shakti: New Age author who popularized Buddhism through creative
   visualization (meditation) techniques. 

   Geller, Uri: Psychic, psychokinesis, ESP and parapsychology. 


   Germain, Saint: See I AM Movement, Ascended Masters. 

   Ghosts: Non-physical entities or spirit beings, often believed to be the
   spirits of the dead. See Spiritualism, Demon, Necromancy, Occult. 


   Global Church of God, Roderick Meredith, San Diego, CA: Splinter group
   from Worldwide Church of God. Teaches a form of Armstrongism. 

   Global Family, Palo Alto, CA: New Age, visualization, Higher self which is
   God, pantheism (all is God). 


   Globalism: When used in a religious sense, this term most often means to
   lose all national identity. Mankind must see itself as one world family,
   without the need for distinctions between religions. All religions become
   true or the distinctive doctrines of the various religions must be
   disregarded in an attempt to achieve the new Global Family idea. 

   Global Times: The bimonthly magazine published by the Denmark office for
   Proutist International. See PROUT. 


   Gnostic Catholic Church of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta: Paganism, magic,
   Celtic rituals. Publishes the Sunspot magazine. 

   Gnosticism: From the Greek word gnosis (knowledge). Salvation comes
   through secret knowledge. A diverse belief influenced by Greek philosophy
   and similar to forms of pantheism, Gnosticism generally taught that matter
   was evil and spirit was good. Forms of gnosticism affected early
   Christianity. One Gnostic heresy taught that because matter was evil,
   Jesus could not have come in the flesh. Many New Agers regard Gnostic
   Christianity as the more enlightened form of Christianity. 


   Gnostic Order of Christ, The, Timothy Harris, San Jose, CA: An esoteric
