Wahoo. A great starting point !

Lets talk about speed of communication.

My goal is to have a mix of information rich core worlds and a frontier that can be used to shelter 
the shady types (those that don't enter the MI).

The confederation communication network in the confed is a mixture of several different 
"pipes".

Between the systems that can afford them there are high bandwidth/high speed transition point repeaters 
that use (starttrek science warning) tachyon beams for communication. The cost is high to allow for the 
positioning, timing and targeting software/hardware. Communication to these relays in normal is done via 
laser. Therefore it is typically (0.5 - 2.0) days for a communication to go between systesm. (0.25 - 1 day day on each side)
Physical courier in most cases will take 2-3 times that. Of course, while the bandwidth of the link itself is high, the 
incoming lasers and other forms may be more limited.

Systems that need emergency communications and are unwilling or unable to afford the 
cost of a full service relay will typically have a torp relay. A torp relay takes 
in communications via laser and transmits it to a simple (but expensive) unmanned torp 
which is launched through the transition point and which then transmits its message to the 
relay on the other side. The speed is almost the same as the full service but the cost of 
recovering and recoditioning the toprs is high and the bandwidth is lower than the full service.

Couriers exist at the frontier. Cost or Choice ? Both in many cases. In many Calvinist systems 
the full-service relay is not available for general use, only government use. "Bulk" mail comes via 
couriers. 

Commercial news and records services have started to pop into existence. Bulk updates are carried on couriers or merchants which 
are actually a higher bandwidth than most methods because memory is so dense and cheap and light compared to the transmission rate
achievable with laser. Warner Media is one of the biggest providers of that service. And people pay a subscription fee fpr the data and 
others pay to be certified for input into the system. Each bit of info is timestamped and priority stamped. A inputter of data
can ask that his entry superseed all previous ones for a fee.

So can someone run to the frontier and outrun their rep ? Absolutely. If they are wanted badly enough
there are private bounty hunters. And if the confed wants them there are the Marshalls.

But the frontier is measured in terms of jumps. And not even just the raw number but the number of 
jumps away from a full service relay. The "Wiccan" and "Calvinist" worlds are the most commonly assumed 
to be part of the frontier but both sets of systems have (mostly) full service relays.

In the case of records of a terrorist attack on another planet you will probably get a list of casualties and 
their names as well as the Media Service's ids for those people but full biography downloads will come 
by slowboat if they are paid for.

Like all empires that have frontiers language is definitely affected by this. Not only do you have the 
colonies that have been rediscovered and the language drift there, you also have the colnies that only have a 
slowboat or other transmission method. Theer will always be drift. As the core of the confed spreads outward 
(i.e. gets full service relays in place) along the transition lines there will be Australia like merging back 
into the main stream but the cuyltural diferences will remain. The drift will even be even more pronounced 
in those regions interconnected among themselves by high speed links but separated from the main core by a slowboat...

