Religion.

My Current Starting point:

Religion is considered by most Terrans to be a Terran invention. 
The Proximan state observances are still being studied to determine 
their religiousness. Alphan scholars have assured Terrans that they 
have no religion as such.

Terran religious distribution is what you would expect. Terra is still 
considered the Mecca for many of these religions but there are a few that 
have recreated themselves in a galatic scope. Notable religions that come to mind:

Buddhism 

    Many flavors that mostly get along.
    One of the most common religions in the Confed.

Zen. 

    Not really considered an offshoot of Bhuddism by most. Very favored among Confed 
military services and martial artists. They use a dialect that is a cross between 
the Landmark Forum and Zen buddhism of today. Gaining some popularity among 
younger Alphans and actively combated by many older Alphans.

Wicca 

    Many flavors, as widely differing as the protestnat sects of contemporary times.
    Sylva, Romean, Kavenism, Daughter Craft, Gaian, etc..

Catholicism
    
     Pretty much the Roman church carried forward. It was revitalised during the 
     "Fire Reformation" and the loss of the Vatican. Several new orders were created 
     during that time period including the Jesuit sponsored lay order the "Cestus Dei"
     
     I haven't really thought about the doctrinal/dogma differences yet. 

Judiasm 

    Not unchanged but still recognizable. 
    
Universalism

    Namby Pamby watered down Unitarians merged with watered down Ba'hai.

Calvinism
    
    Most Protestant sects have dwindled to minor offshoots of this umbrella label. 
    Not clear yet on what teh doctrine is but asceticism and fundamental one on one relationship 
    with god is a mainstay.
    
Scientology (under a different name) 

    Believes that Alpahsn are the original carriers of the Thetans or the Thetans themselves...

Islam
    How will it transform...

Many planets are populated by single religions and religious tolerance 
is an issue in many systems. Note that Freedom of religion is not a confed 
guarenteed right..