



   Go to Google alt.society.futures "futu   Google Search   • Advanced Groups Se
                                                            • Groups Help
                    Search all groups     Search the Web
                  *
    Groups search result 4 for alt.society.futures "future history"


    From: John Hyde (eushyde@cnn.exu.ericsson.se)              Search Result 4
    Subject: Re: future histories
    Newsgroups: alt.society.futures, alt.history.future
    Date:    View: (This is the only article in this thread) | Original Format
    1996/09/04


   My predictions:

   In article <50dfcb$5o@darla.visi.com> dsgood@visi.com (Daniel Goodman) writes
   >Poul Anderson's first future history had to be abandoned when World War
   >III failed to occur on schedule.

   1.  WWIII will not happen, at least not for several more centuries.
   If it ever DOES come, it will not be nuclear.

   >His current future history is
   >rather imprecise about what happens during the next two or three hundred
   >years.

   2. A "spiritual renaissance" is due to become widely in evidence, and
   will be going full force by the year 2050.  It will not necessarily
   come about without a healthy dose of controversey.  It will be
   centered in the US, with Russia as a possible secondary center.

   The main obstacle will be the Christian fundamentalists, even though
   the new outlooks will be essentially Christian in nature.

   >Dr. Pournelle has now been betrayed by the Russians, who inconsiderately
   >disposed of the Soviet Union.

   3.  Despite fits and starts, and occasional setbacks, Russia will
   never again become as isolated and confrontational as has been the
   case for the past few hundred years, most especially during the 20th
   century.

   4.  China will never become the big threat to world peach that they
   have the potential of becoming, either.

   5.  Eugenics will eventually re-appear as a subject for social and
   scientific discourse.  The new eugenics will be (at first, at least)
   wholly voluntary.  A probably scenario is this:

   At birth, a child will receive a complete genetic analysis, designed
   to dtermine the presence of life-threatening genetic abnormalities.
   For instance, it was just discovered that a certain gene, if present,
   mutates easily in the skin when exposed to UV rays, leading to basil
   cell skin cancer.  Persons possessing this gene would be advised to
   avoid UV rays for the rest of their life.  The cost for the genetic
   analysis will be around $500, and the insurance companies will gladly
   pay for it, despite severe legal restrictions on how they can use the
   information.

   At marriage, a genetic analyst will look at the two genetic profiles
   and advise the couple on the liklihood of what, if any, genetic
   abnormalities may appear in their children.  Couples with a >90%
   chance of producing children with severe disabilities will be advised
   to adopt.

   I don't expect the above prediction to begin to take place until we
   have essentially completed the human geneome project, and that may end
   up taking much longer than we currently think.

   6.  The field of "mental efficiency" will be come more prominent and
   respectable.  This is already happening, and this trend will continue
   into the indefinite future.  Perhaps it may become a branch of
   psychology, which is also a trend already in evidence.

   Perhaps some day "learning how to learn" will be taught as directly
   and widely as "learning facts" and "learning problem-sloving
   methodologies" is taught today.

   >I expect him to follow Anderson's example, and come up with a future
   >history which is kind of vague about the "near" future.

   Are these predictions specific enough?

   --
   John C. Hyde                                     eushyde@exu.ericsson.se
   "Only a brave person is able honestly to accept, and fearlessly to face,
   what a sincere and logical mind discovers."         -Rodan of Alexandria



              Google Web Directory - Cool Jobs - Advertise with Us -
       Add Google to Your Site - Google in Your Language - All About Google


                                   ©2001 Google
