



   Go to Google alt.society.futures "futu   Google Search   • Advanced Groups Se
                                                            • Groups Help
                    Search all groups     Search the Web
                  *
    Groups search result 1 for alt.society.futures "future history"


    From: John Hyde (eushyde@cnn.exu.ericsson.se)              Search Result 1
    Subject: Future history?
    Newsgroups: alt.history.future, alt.society.futures,
    alt.society.paradigms, alt.religion.urantia-book
    Date: 1997/09/10      View: Complete Thread (2 articles) | Original Format


   What exactly is the mandate for this newsgroup (alt.history.future)?

   [Note that I have copied this posting to alt.society.futures,
   alt.society.paradigms, and alt.religion.urantia-book, since these
   newsgroups also seem to be relevant to the contents of this posting].

   For instance, I am a reader of a well-written and well-organized
   revelatory book entitled _The Urantia Book_.  In it, a few of the
   chapters (papers) are devoted to the long-term destiny of the human
   race.  In short, the human race will continue to exist and to progress
   culturally and scientifically, though not at steady rates.  The next
   1,000 years will be especially tumultous from a cultural standpoint.

   The book seems to infer (though it never directlys tates this) that
   interstellar travel is not feasible, at least at any time in the near
   future (the next 20,000 years, at any rate, IMO).  The real challenges
   facing mankind are those of peaceful coexistence and global resource
   management.  These challenges are only mastered over time, an
   inevitable and inexorable byproduct of the evolutionary process.

   The radically nonuniform development of our world is due to to our
   bizarre and highly unusual early history (marred by events taking
   origin in the Lucifer rebellion).  So, in addition to the usual
   challenges facing our planet as the industrial and scientific age
   spreads its influence, we also have to contend with cultures that have
   not even progressed beyond the stages of tribal warfare (national
   warfare is considered an advance over tribal warfare,
   evolutionarily-speaking).

   Additionally, the coalescing process of human groupings is portrayed
   as a natural evolutionary byproduct.  Families lead to tribes.  Tribes
   lead to states.  States lead to countries.  Countries lead to
   multi-national alliances, which eventually lead to world government.


   Here's a brief excerpt from paper 71, "Development of the State."
   This paper appears to be a guide to those persons who might be
   involved with decision-making in some present or future political
   entity:

               2. THE EVOLUTION OF REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT

   Democracy, while an ideal, is a product of civilization, not of
   evolution. Go slowly! select carefully! for the dangers of democracy
   are:

     1. Glorification of mediocrity.
     2. Choice of base and ignorant rulers.
     3. Failure to recognize the basic facts of social evolution.
     4. Danger of universal suffrage in the hands of uneducated and
        indolent majorities.
     5. Slavery to public opinion; the majority is not always right.

   Public opinion, common opinion, has always delayed society;
   nevertheless, it is valuable, for, while retarding social evolution,
   it does preserve civilization. Education of public opinion is the only
   safe and true method of accelerating civilization; force is only a
   temporary expedient, and cultural growth will increasingly accelerate
   as bullets give way to ballots. Public opinion, the mores, is the
   basic and elemental energy in social evolution and state development,
   but to be of state value it must be nonviolent in expression.

   The measure of the advance of society is directly determined by the
   degree to which public opinion can control personal behavior and state
   regulation through nonviolent expression. The really civilized
   government had arrived when public opinion was clothed with the powers
   of personal franchise. Popular elections may not always decide things
   rightly, but they represent the right way even to do a wrong
   thing. Evolution does not at once produce superlative perfection but
   rather comparative and advancing practical adjustment.

   There are ten steps, or stages, to the evolution of a practical and
   efficient form of representative government, and these are:

   1. Freedom of the person. Slavery, serfdom, and all forms of human
   bondage must disappear.

   2. Freedom of the mind. Unless a free people are educated -- taught to
   think intelligently and plan wisely -- freedom usually does more harm
   than good.

   3. The reign of law. Liberty can be enjoyed only when the will and
   whims of human rulers are replaced by legislative enactments in
   accordance with accepted fundamental law.

   4. Freedom of speech. Representative government is unthinkable without
   freedom of all forms of expression for human aspirations and opinions.

   5. Security of property. No government can long endure if it fails to
   provide for the right to enjoy personal property in some form. Man
   craves the right to use, control, bestow, sell, lease, and bequeath
   his personal property.

   6. The right of petition. Representative government assumes the right
   of citizens to be heard. The privilege of petition is inherent in free
   citizenship.

   7. The right to rule. It is not enough to be heard; the power of
   petition must progress to the actual management of the government.

   8. Universal suffrage. Representative government presupposes an
   intelligent, efficient, and universal electorate. The character of
   such a government will ever be determined by the character and caliber
   of those who compose it. As civilization progresses, suffrage, while
   remaining universal for both sexes, will be effectively modified,
   regrouped, and otherwise differentiated.

   9. Control of public servants. No civil government will be serviceable
   and effective unless the citizenry possess and use wise techniques of
   guiding and controlling officeholders and public servants.

   10. Intelligent and trained representation. The survival of democracy
   is dependent on successful representative government; and that is
   conditioned upon the practice of electing to public offices only those
   individuals who are technically trained, intellectually competent,
   socially loyal, and morally fit. Only by such provisions can
   government of the people, by the people, and for the people be
   preserved.

   --
   John C. Hyde                                     eushyde@exu.ericsson.se
   "Only a brave person is able honestly to accept, and fearlessly to face,
   what a sincere and logical mind discovers."         -Rodan of Alexandria


              Google Web Directory - Cool Jobs - Advertise with Us -
       Add Google to Your Site - Google in Your Language - All About Google


                                   ©2001 Google
