






        FAQ on Tips for posting to soc.history.what-if (ver 1.02)





             world spins towards past
        Jump                           Back . . . . Aspire World spins towards f

                                      Ahead



                             Pteranodon's IMAGE View

   The huge winged creature Pteranodon (say "Teranodon") has seen the world
   develop over a hundred million years. This is his view on:


                   FAQ Tips for posting to soc.history.what-if
                                    (ver 1.02)

    1. Introduction


    Welcome to Usenet newsgroup soc.history.what-if!

    This is a friendly place where we reject the idea that there are
    inevitable forces of history that push us towards an inevitable
    historical outcome. We refute this determinism, and have a lot of fun
    while doing so, by considering the different possible outcomes of
    historical events. We explore alternate history, historical what-ifs,
    allohistory and counterfactuals


    We change the past to learn about the consequences, for better or worse,
    of actions that might have been taken in the past, and to appreciate the
    role of chance and luck. But we make our changes in the framework of our
    understanding of the multitude of small changes that are called forces,
    trends, or developments, as well as the social and technical constraints
    of an era.

    Every action has its consequences!


    READ THE HEADLINES!

    Note: You need to use a Javascript equipped browser to view the
    headlines.


    This Posting Tips FAQ will help you to post to soc.history.what-if and
    to enjoy your participation in our discussions.


   You do not have to be an expert historian to post a what-if to
   soc.history.what-if. However, make sure you have a some understanding of
   the historical era of your what-if question before you post it. Sections 1
   and 3 of "tips" will help you design your what-if. Section 4 will help you
   present your what-if in a way that encourages other people to discuss it.

   Try and understand the concept of plausibility in history. An alternate
   history can include dramatic and improbable events and still be plausible.


   Plausibility does not equal probability. Rather it attempts to resemble
   the process of real history. We observe that real history the blend of the
   many factors. For an alternate history to work it needs to recognize that
   change results from a wide variety of causes.

   Every action has its consequences!


   First, history is made by our choices, by our will to act and to
   persevere. Muhammed, Napoleon, Buddha, St. Paul, Newton, Hitler, Genghis
   Khan, and many less noticed people changed history by applying their will.

   Second, consider chance and luck -- good and bad, such as the message on
   Japanese military activity that sat on a shelf over the weekend before the
   Pearl Harbor attack, or Hitler's survival running though the WW I
   trenches.


   Third, consider the progressive accumulation of many small events that we
   call by names such as trends, forces, processes, and waves.

   Plausibility is related to probability in that it captures the summation
   of all of these results. For example if it took six weeks to sail from
   Acapulco to Manilla in a Galleon in fair weather and the fastest recorded
   trip was four weeks, it is not plausible to have an alternate history
   depend on a usual sailing time of four weeks.


   It is plausible to have improbable events, but not an endless series of
   them. In real history the sequence for "want of of a nail the shoe was
   lost, for want of a shoe the horse was lost, for want of a horse the
   battle was lost, for want of a battle the empire was lost" just does not
   happen. At one stage or antoher someone uses a substitute.

   Plausibility is also related to feasibility. A standard example is the
   Roman steam engine. It is very unlikely that the Romans would have any
   interest in developing a steam engine. It is of primary value as a labor
   saving machine. Even if a Roman decided to make one, he could not just go
   and throw one together at his villa. Our inventive Roman could not make a
   steam engine without having the ability to do metal fabrication, machining
   and instrumentation similar to that of 18th century Europe. It took
   hundreds of years of trial and error to produce these necessary preceding
   technologies. Consider just one of them, a boring mill to manufacture
   cylinders. This technology was developed in Europe to make better cannon.
   So Roman development of a working steam engine--as opposed to a ball that
   spins by venting steam--would have depended on improving their seige
   machinery by developing something that fired through tubes. Gunpowder is
   not essential. The key is precision matching of the tube and projectile
   diameters.


   Plausiblity is also related to the speed at which societies absorb change.
   We have regular elections and respect the results. This took hundreds of
   years to be accepted as the way of legitizing power. It would not be
   plausible to have Ferdinand and Isablella chuck the Inquistion and
   legitimate their power by popular election.

   Plausibility also sums up other elements, which are described in this
   Posting "Tips" FAQ.


   As for alternate history fiction, most of it is not very plausible but we
   accept it where it creates a persuasive illusion of a world.

   Respect our Charter by not discussing adventures in published fictional
   worlds (see section 2 of "tips"), or revisionist history, such as
   Holocaust denial, (see section 5, of "tips," which will also help you to
   avoid other problems.


   Finally, "tips" does not attempt to duplicate the "Frequently Asked
   Questions in soc.history.what-if" maintained and regularly posted to the
   newsgroup by Craig J Neumeier, (neume001@maroon.tc.umn.edu). Read it.

   Craig Neumeier agreed to have his FAQ hosted on Pteranodon's View website
   at URL:


           http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/4123/main.htm

   I completed HTMLizing it on January 7, 1998 and placed it on the site.



   Table of Contents



      *Introduction

      *1. Finding interesting topics

      *2. Published alternate history fiction
           Charter prohibits discussion of adventures in published fictional
           worlds

      *3. Creating your own alternative history (AH)
           Two basic techniques for creating an AH
           Kit of working resources for doing WI's
               Atlas
               Dictionary
               Chronology
               Technology
               Ideas
           Plausibility, probability, the unexpected, luck and chance
           Plausibility checklist
           Fictional AH's less plausible than our discussions
           Authentic sounding names for persons in your AH
           What is plausible technological change?
           Ancient technolology
           Medieval Islamic science and technology
           Early Modern Western science and technology
           The English Industrial Revolution
           Contemporary technology

      *4. Getting other people to discuss your AH
           Use a descriptive Subject line
           Organize your presentation
           Consider using names for your AH people
           Format your text so people can read it no matter what newsreader
           they are using
           "Double blind" AHs

      *5. Avoiding problems
           Prepare to defend your assertions
           Learn how to deal with difficult people
           Make your comments readable
           Do not cross-post
           Dealing with crossposted trolls
           Do not encourage "Holocaust deniers" to argue their views
           Do not engage in "fanish" discussion of published AH fiction
           Do not engage in discussion of future history
           Do not post binaries
           Read the Charter

      *6. Text of the charter of soc.history.what-if
       7. Credits and thanks
      *
       8. Copyright notice
      *


   1. Finding interesting topics


   1.01 If your newsreader can sort by thread, scan the list of
   soc.history.what-if subjects and start with a few that match your
   interests, whether they are the Normans fail to conquer England or a
   replay of World War II. Beware, though, there are several cranks around.
   If you read a post that attacks the poster personally rather than the
   ideas, ignore it. If you see several objectionable posts from the same
   person, ignore discussions that involve that person.

   1.02 If you find an interesting post but previous posts have expired on
   your local ISP's server, you can find them at:
           http://www.dejanews.com


   1.03 Soc.history.what-if was created by people who wanted a forum to
   examine real history and see how things might have developed differently
   if people had made other decisions or had different luck at a historical
   "point of departure" (POD) This is called alternate history (AH),
   allohistory, counterfactual history, or uchronia.

   1.04 AH topics start with a what-if (WI), usually in the form of a
   "what-if" question that calls for an answer that explains how history
   would have been different from real history to cause the change at the POD
   and explains how the AH would then differ from real history after the POD.
   The POD can be a battle, an election, the premature death of a key person,
   the birth of a breakthrough person when during an uneventful period in
   real history, a scientific discovery, or anything else of historic
   importance.


   Return to start


   2. Published alternate history fiction

   Charter prohibits discussion of adventures in published fictional worlds


   2.01 Our Charter prohibits discussion of adventures in published fictional
   worlds, such as Draka or Starship Troopers. The following should help you
   distinguish what is appropriate for discussion on soc.history.what-if from
   what should be posted to rec.arts.sf.written:



        * If you want to discuss a published AH story, post to
       rec.arts.sf.written only. However, there is a limited exemption for
       speculation about how the history created in the published story
       would work as an alternate history. This includes discussing history
       from the individualist perspective of the real world persons that may
       appear in a published AH, and the characters of the individuals who
       made history. For example we can take the WI that the South won the
       US civil war in the manner described in Mr. Turtledove's How Few
       Remain, and we could discuss how this would affect Abe Lincoln. Our
       discussion could include the plausibility of Turtledove's speculation
       that Lincoln's actions would lead Theodore Roosevelt to accuse him
       Lincoln being a Red Marxist. Similarly we can discuss arguments that
       How Few Remain misinterpreted Blaine's character and made him take
       historical actions that he could not have taken in a plausible AH.


    * The authors of successful AH fiction, such as Mr. Turtledove or Mr.
   Stirling, are sometimes very knowlegeable about the real history of the
   eras covered by their stories. They choose outcomes that they know are
   implausible because these are the ones with maximum dramatic impact. For
   this reason alone their published AH fiction is better discussed in
   rec.arts.sf.written rather than soc.history.what-if. There is also a Draka
   fan page at http://www.mindspring.com/~atalbott/index.html



    * There is general consensus that the Draka history is one of the
   best-developed published alternate histories, which overcomes the fact
   that it is very improbable in its historical development. However it is
   implausible mainly because of the improbability that the society could
   work if it actually came into existence. The uniformity of Draka belief,
   their high level of civic responsibility, and irresistable slave-training
   techniques are very unlikely to evolve from the Draka roots as Southern
   slaveholders. Nor is the docility of the slave culture plausible.


    * If you want to discuss how you enjoyed or detested the story, and
   fiction specifics, such as the degree of dramatic tension, the amount of
   "enjoyably nasty stuff," plot resolution by a deus ex machina, "how
   faithful the movie was to the book, political correctness of the story or
   movie, the techniques the author uses to develop the character of a
   fictional person, such as by writing from a first person or third person
   viewpoint, or colorful description of personal quirks, you should all be
   post to rec.arts.sf.written.


      Do not cross-post from soc.history.what-if to rec.arts.sf.written. See
    *
   section 5 of "tips" for more on cross-posting.

   Return to start



   3. Creating your own alternative history (AH)

   Three basic techniques for creating an AH

   3.01 Set out some circumstances for your proposed what-if and sketch out a
   few thoughts on what you think might happen if the what-if occured. There
   are two basic techniques for creating an AH:



        * Reverse-engineer: write backwards. If you conceive of a social
       arrangenment, such as a British North America east of the Mississipi
       during the 19th century, all you have to do is figure out the series
       of events that would have led from your POD, in this case probably no
       American Revolution, or a failed one, to your British North America
       of 1876.


        * Or you could postulate a POD and figure out what changes in history
       would be necessary for a change to occur. For example, the Japanese
       closed their world to outside influences starting in the 17th
       century, and this isolation lasted until the Americans forced them to
       open to foreign trade in the 19th century. What changes in history
       would be needed for the Japanese to remain open to the world?


          Consider POD's other than big changes such as who won or lost the
       usually recognized decisive battle. AH design can be most satisfying
       if you go further back in history and make a fairly small change. For
       example the big battle method of keeping the U.S. in the British
       Empire would be to have the British win the battle of Saratoga. But
       this is very late in the movement towards independence. It is still
       likely that as the thirteen colonies recovered from the defeat they
       would revert, sooner or later, to their common efforts to win
       independence. The way to have kept the British colonies in the empire
       would have been to have blocked the initial stages of a single
       independence movement. An effective POD would make Britain give each
       colony a separate and independent legislative body by perhaps 1770,
       with each having its own tax-raising power. This was long before the
       colonies united to overthrow British rule. This POD would "divide and
       conquer." Britain would thus have empowered each colony to set its
       own domestic policy, in the framework of British foreign and imperial
       policy. As each colony separately developed it would have less and
       less in common with the other colonies and an independent unified
       state would be unlikely to develop because each state had a vested
       interest in maintaining its relative independence.


   Return to start



   Kit of working resources for doing WI's

   3.02 Assemble a small kit of working resources for doing WI's. A
   historical atlas, a dictionary which includes historical information in
   its entries, a chronology and some material relating to the era of your WI
   are very helpful. Here are a few recommendations:


   Return to start



       Atlas


        * Atlas. Borders change in history. It is very helpful to look a map
       that shows the names and extent of countries at the ime of your POD.
       A good historical atlas for this purpose is The Harper Atlas of World
       History, (William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd., 1987). The format is a
       series of double page presentations on specific topics with from one
       to ten simplified maps showing borders, key names, and major changes.
       A short text explains the maps. A detailed chonology matches the
       maps. Covers all regions of the world. This is the English
       translation of Le grand livre de l'histoire du monde; atlas
       historique, edited by Pierre Vidal-Naquet with text by about 60
       persons(Paris; France Loisirs, 1986) ISBN 2.7242.3083.3. Inspired by
       the historical concept of Braudel, history as the details of all
       aspects of life.



        * Atlas. The Times Atlas of World History, 4th ed., edited by
       Geoffrey Barraclough (Times Books, Harper Collins Publishers, London,
       Hammond Incorporated, Maplewood, NJ;1993) ISBN 0-7230-0534-6. First
       published in 1978. Any edition is suitable. More general thematic
       treatment of eras than Harper. An excellent way for you to gain an
       overall understanding of an era and the changes that can be made in
       it. My only reservation is that it persists in using Wade-Giles
       instead of pinyin romanized Chinese names.


        * Atlas. The Anchor Atlas of World History, maps facing chronologies.
       It is 2 paperback volumes of about 300 pages each. Standard-sized
       paperbacks; physically easy to handle, compared to a normal atlas,
       though the maps are quite small. [deserves more comment]


          Atlas. Colin McEvedy, Penguin Atlas of Ancient History, Penguin
        *
       Atlas of Medieval History, Penguin Atlas of Modern History, Penguin
       Atlas of Recent History. Maps are series of overviews of Europe and
       West Asia, or Europe alone, with a few World maps. A short text
       explains each map. Focus almost exclusively on Europe and West Asia.
       Landscape format double size paperbacks; physically easy to handle,
       compared to a normal atlas. Very handy for quick reference. 

       Return to start



       Dictionary



        * Dictionary. Any large dictionary of about 250,000 entries that uses
       an encylopedic approach. Particularly useful for short historical
       summaries are the ones that incorporate information from The Larousse
       Illustrated International Encyclopedia and Dictionary. Check the
       dictionary to see if it has extended entries on historical subjects
       such as Enlightenment, country names, historical personages,
       locations.

       Return to start




       Chronology


        * Chronology. By far the best is a one volume enclopedia last
       published, AFAIK, in 1972: An Encyclopedia of World History; Ancient,
       Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged, compiled and edited
       by William L. Langer, (Houghton Mifflin, 1948). This is the English
       language edition of Dr. Karl Ploetz's Auszug aus der alten, mittleren
       und neueren Geschichte, which went through many editions. This is the
       best source to use when trying to fit together the bare bones facts
       of who, what, when, where and why. Few wasted words. In some
       instances current interpretations of events are different than
       Langer's. Some ancient dates have been revised. Detail on history
       outside Western Society and its predecessors is skimpy. But I have
       yet to find a good supplement to cover China and other non-Western
       chronological development in detail.


       Return to start



       Technology


        * Technology, ancient. Ancient Inventions by Peter James and Nick
       Thorpe, (Random House, 1994) ISBN 0-345-36476-7. Easy to understand.
       Illustrations. For a more scholarly book try R. J. Forbes, Studies in
       ancient technology, 3rd. ed. (Leiden 1993). Covers Egyptian and
       Mesopotamian technology as well as the more commonly known
       Greco-Romans. Useful insights beyond nuts and bolts, such as the
       surprising failure of greeks and Romans to adopt superior farming
       techniques that they must have observed in West Asia, which the Arabs
       later successful used in the Mediterranean region. An AH designer
       might change this by using a POD based on the idea that the Greeks
       and Romans they were slave owning societies, which produced a chronic
       labor surplus that served as a disincentive to seeking labor saving
       improvements; or a POD to change their attitude of cultural
       superiority, which made them downplay the value of things that they
       did not develop themselves.



        * Technology, Chinese. Glance through the following easy to find book
       before developing strong opinions about ancient Chinese technology
       and the ability of the Chinese to undertake practical innovation.
       Robert Temple, with an introduction by Joseph Needham, The Genius of
       China: 3,000 years of Science, Discovery, and Invention, (Touchstone,
       Simon and Schuster, 1989) ISBN 0-671-62028-2 ISBN 0-671-67407-2 Pbk
       Originally published in the U.K. as China: Land of Discovery and
       Invention, (Patrick Stevens Ltd., 1986). It's also a good source for
       AH technology devices that look different than the Western tradition.
       For example there was an ancient Chinese system of measurements --
       length, width, volume -- based on the musical pitches of bells. By
       contrast the modern metric system began with the Englightenment idea
       of replacing the measure of the distance between the kings nose and
       fingertip (the yard) with a crude measure of of the circumferance of
       world, divided by a number that would yield an answer about the same
       length as the yard. Western measures displaced the Chinese measures
       based on harmonic sounds. But when you think about it, physics and
       engineering based on harmonic measures could have progressed directly
       to measuring distance by the frequency of light waves, as we do now,
       and could have skipped much of the instrumentation based development
       of Western measurement.

       Return to start




       Ideas


        * Ideas. Disease. Plagues and Peoples by William H. McNeill. A top
       historian's readable overview of disease and history. How plagues hit
       the late Roman Empire, stalled Alexander's invasion of India,
       required cities to rely on migration from rural areas to maintain
       their populations. For a current assessment of plagues by a biology
       professor see Yellow Fever, Black Goddess: The Coevolution of People
       and Plagues, by Christopher Wills (Addison-Wesley Pub Co, 1997). Both
       McNeill and Wills argue that evolution will uniformly favor benign
       pathogens over the long term. Because parasites need hosts to
       survive, virulent pathogens would be at an evolutionary disadvantage.
       Pathogens, such as Yersinia pestis, the bacterium that causes bubonic
       plague, survive only in specialized conditions and are highly
       vulnerable to things that disturb its universe, which explains why
       plague outbreaks do not last. But there is a caveat for McNeill and
       Wills. They limit their definition of plague to something that
       eventually subsides. The most dramatic examples are the pandemics
       such as the Black Death of the 6th, 14th and 17th centuries and the
       Influenza of 1918. But there are diseases that kill in large numbers
       for millennia. A contrary view is that there are perpetual plagues
       where the particulars of transmission favor both high virulence and
       high frequency of infection. For example areas where mosquito density
       is perpetually high, enable Plasmodium falciparum malaria to kill
       many people, year after year. The AH designer should consider the
       effects of these perpetual plagues diseases as well as sporatic ones.
       Such perpetual plagues blocked Western exploitation of Africa for
       centuries until modern medicine and provided some protection. For
       views that contrast with McNeil and Wills see a book by another
       biology professor, Paul Ewald, Evolution of Infectious Disease
       (Oxford University Press, 1994).


        * Ideas. The Measure of Reality: Quantification and Western Society,
       1250-1600, Alfred W. Crosby (1997). ISBN 0-521-55427-6 ISBN
       0-521-63990-5 Pbk. A thesis that the West's great distinction was to
       meld mathematics and measurement into a mindset -- to use
       quantification to understand everything material within time and
       space; to measure reality. Argues that quantification explains how
       the West leaped from a sub-Euclidean legacy to the universe Galileo
       describes, to a culture that spawned navigation, astronomy,
       cartography, commercial and banking procedures and practical and
       theoretical mathematics. This change spread through the
       psyche--mentalité--of the West. It became the way of thinking of the
       world that gave the West decisively important administrative,
       commercial, industrial and military skills not developed in other
       Societies. This suggests AH's in which one of the other major
       Societies, such as Islam or China, evolve the quantification
       mentalité before the West, and thereby modernize and dominate the
       world.



        * Ideas. The Colonizer's Model of the World, J.M. Blaut. A thesis
       that that the rise of Europe to modernity and world dominance is the
       result of is access to the New World, which unbalanced the Eurasian
       economic system in favour of Europe, rather than due to some unique
       European quality of race, environment, culture, mind, or spirit, and
       that progress for the rest of the world results from the diffusion of
       European civilization. Blaut argues the diffusionist doctrine is the
       world model constructed by Europeans to explain, justify, and assist
       their colonial expansion. This suggests AH's in which one of the
       other major Societies, such as Islam or China, discover and exploit
       the Americas before the Europeans. Use Blaut's thesis with caution.
       European sea dominance came centuries before industrial take-off and
       the economic dominance of Western Society. Blaut fails to prove that
       they were causally related.


        * Ideas. Annales historians, Braudel, Darnton, Ladurie, Schama. Since
       about 1929 Annales historians have rejected both classical political
       history, which assumes common people live in history but do not make
       history and that political ideas govern economic behavior; and the
       Procrustean bed of any determinist big theory, such as Marx. A
       synthesis of styles and specialities, focused on data from primary
       documents, closely checked rather than accepted as prima facie true
       and complete. Annalists search for long term historical dynamics,
       without assuming it must be economic interest, religious ideology, or
       dynastic ambitions of royal dynasties. I highly recommend many of the
       Annales books to AH researchers for their fascinating detail and high
       quality writing. The top Annales historian was Fernand Braudel, The
       Mediterranean and Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century.
       Braudel wrote in French and was mostly ignored in English speaking
       countries until his books were translated into English.



        * Ideas. Ecology. AH design can benefit from biological and
       ecological perspectives on human history which, among other things
       offer recurrent motifs such as "the irrigation system collapsed."
       Clive Ponting, Green History of the World. Humans have been
       destroying the environment since prehistoric times. Many examples of
       destruction for AH designers to change. A simple formula for
       disaster: successful Societies produce surplus food which allows the
       rise of culture, civil and military hierarchies. These institutions
       vastly increase demands on the ecosystem for food and energy that
       outstrip the local ecosystem's ability to sustain. What follows is an
       inevitable downward cycle of diminishing returns resulting from
       over-irrigation of lands, leading to rising of water tables and the
       salinization of the land and a consequent fall in the production of
       the agricultural output leading to eventual shortfalls in surpluses,
       starvation and the demise of the culture. Other examples:
       deforestation, extermination of species.


        * Ideas. Environmental determinism, biogeography. Jared Diamond, 
       Guns, Germs and Steel, (W.W. Norton & Co, 1997, ISBN 0-224-03809-5).
       Western Society defeated its competitors because geography gave it
       diverse flora and fauna. Eurasia had more types of plants and large
       animals to domesticate than other regions. Ambitious broad brush
       human history since the Ice Age in the context of geography,
       demography, and ecological happenstance. Eurasia has geography better
       than other regions for to farming, domestication of animals, and
       information flow. It developed populous cultures with complex
       government and communication -- and increased resistance to disease.
       Societies that gained a head start in producing food would overpower
       preliterate ones. Domestication of animals made Eurasians resistant
       to these germs that they later spread in epidemic proportions in
       their voyagesof discovery. Diamonds's thesis is a "positive feedback
       loop" from farming, domestication, population density, to innovation.
       Why did peoples of some regions fail to domesticate plants? Why were
       most big wild mammal species never domesticated? Why did food
       production spread at different rates on different continents? The
       final chapter, "The Future of History as a Science," is almost an AH
       factory. It argues that students of humanity have examples and
       "natural experiments" to make comparisons. For example, after the
       15th century fragmented Europe harnessed competitive innovation in
       ways that over-unified China did not. Christendom adopted the wheel,
       the key machine element, while the Islamic Society discarded it


          Ideas. Evolution and "biological determinism" This category of
       books provides many unexpected examples and illustrations that you
       can adapt to explain AH changes. Jared Diamond, The Rise and Fall of
       the Third Chimpanzee (ISBN 0 09 991380 1). But how do we reconcile
       the idea of evolution by natural selection relentlessly favoring
       self-interest, for example Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, with the
       complex societies developed by human beings and the abundance of
       human cooperative spirit? For an answer read Matt Ridley, The Origins
       of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution of Cooperation, (Viking
       Penguin, 1997, ISBN 0670874493). Matt Ridley summarizes his book. It
       "is about the billion-year coagulation of our genes into cooperative
       teams, the million-year coagulation of our ancestors into cooperative
       societies, and the thousand-year coagulation of ideas about society
       and its origins." He suggests a new paradox: "Our minds have been
       built by selfish genes, but they have been built to be social,
       trustworthy and cooperative." The AH designer will find inspiration
       in examples of societies built upon voluntary exchange of goods,
       information, fortune and power between free individuals -- trust,
       mutuality and reciprocity -- before authoritarian government
       suppressed the arrangements. Merchant guilds. Merchant communities in
       North Italy (which was spared the strong monarchies and godfathers of
       the South). Trade precedes law. Modern commercial law was invented
       and enforced by merchants to facilitate trade in the 11th century.
       Merchants in a foreign country had no recourse to their prince if
       cheated and no confidence that the same standards applied there as at
       home. Merchants voluntarily produced, voluntarily adjudicated and
       voluntarily enforced the lex mercatoria. It evolved. Natural
       selection allowed good customs and ways of settling disputes to drive
       out inferior ones. By the 12th century it provided substantial
       protection. But the adapability of the system was lost as goverments
       increased their power and froze the arrangements into laws enforced
       by the state. Merchants have made repeated attempts to bypass the
       congested courts by commercial arbitration. The collapse of community
       spirit in the last few decades, and the erosion of civic virtue, is
       caused not by the the spread and encouragement of greed but by the
       spread of Levitathan, the powerful state that makes no bargain with
       the citizen to take joint responsibility for civic order, engenders
       in the citizen no obligation, duty or pride, and imposes obedience
       instead. Thus the citizen, treated as an naughty child, behaves like
       one. Examples of where authority replaced reciprocity and the sense
       of community failed. Ineffective welfare state based on condensation
       replaced effective community institutions. Material improvement is
       the result of new technology, not government. Socially the
       deterioration is marked "for St Augustine the source of social order
       lay in the teachings of Christ. For Hobbes it lay in the sovereign.
       For Lenin it lay in the party. They were all wrong. The roots of
       social order are in our heads, where we possess the instincitve
       capacities for creating not a perfectly harmonious and virtuous
       society, but a better one than we have at present." The AH designer
       should recognize that the medieval vassal and the industrial age
       factory worker had no freedom to build a society based on trust and
       reciprocity between equals in a Society dominated by the heirarchical
       authority of prince and church, aristocratic or industrial system.
       But there are many other opportunities to apply the thesis that
       government does not impose virtue on inherently evil people, which is
       the thesis of Hobbes' Leviathan and contemporary liberals. "We are
       not so nasty that they need to be tamed by intrusive government, nor
       so nice that intrusive government does not bring out the worst in us,
       both as its employees and as its clients." History provides many
       POD's where a society could have developed alternatives to a
       "government that dictates the minutist details of life and squats
       like a giant flea upon the back of the nation."



        * Ideas. Evolution and "biological determinism" Other views: Steve
       Jones, The Language of the Genes (ISBN 0 00 654676 5) and In the
       Blood (ISBN 0 00 255511 5).


        * Ideas. The Nine Nations of North America, Joel Garreau. A
       journalist argues that North America is nine "nations" based on
       culture and economics. These offer a set of possible alternatives to
       real world boundaries. Garreau's nations are: New England, Quebec,
       The Foundry (Industrial MidWest, PA, NY, NJ, etc.), The Breadbasket
       (Great Plains), The Empty Quarter (Rocky Mountains, Great Basin, most
       of Alaska and non-Pacific Western Canada), Ecotopia (Pacific
       Northwest, sometimes called Cascadia), Mexamerica (Mexico, South
       Texas and California), Dixie (Deep South), The Islands (South
       Florida, the Caribbean, and the north coast of South America).



        * Ideas. Connections and The Day the Universe Changed, James Burke.
       Companion books to BBC TV series. Burke talking about unexpected
       interrelations of technologies, economics, history, etc. Burke is a
       good source of AH ideas but should be read with the caveat that many
       of his linkages are very forced. His working technique was to find
       two seemingly unrelated events and then dig until he found some way
       to link them. Great drama but not a plausible causal progression.


        * Ideas. Indian Givers : How the Indians of the Americas Transformed
       the World, Jack Weatherford (1990 ?). Discovery of the New World
       affected Europe through increasing the supply of gold and silver,
       adding new food crops and medicines, inspiring democracy. Note
       particularly the AH possibilities in the chapter on Cahokia and the
       Mississipians. Read with the caveat that it has a PC bias. For
       example it overates the American Indian contribution to American
       democracy. The Iroquois constitution is a pale shadow of the
       inspiration the US Founders took from of ancient Greece and Rome.


          Don't discount books written primarily for juvenile readers. They
        *
       can help clarify complex issues. For example the Kingfisher
       Illustrated History of the World: 40,000 BC to the Present Day,
       Charlotte Evans, general editor (New York: Kingfisher Books, 1993).
       ISBN 1856978621. Fairly thorough, with plenty of maps and a timeline
       with many POD possibilities.


        * Books recommended to me that I have not evaluated. You may find
       them useful. Peter Brown, The Body and Society. Intellectual and
       social history of the Antique world; and The Rise of Western
       Christendom, (much broader in scope than the title suggests).
       Edward Hyams - Soil and Civilization, John Perlin - A Forest Journey.
       World histories from the perspective of soil and tree use
       respectively.

   Return to start


   Plausibility, probability, the unexpected, luck and chance


   3.03 Plausibility, probability, the unexpected, luck and chance.


        * You should do some sort of reality check on your POD and AH. It is
       not plausible to propose that the Roman Empire survives almost
       unchanged to the present day, with the exception that the Imperial
       guards use machine guns and some totalitarian techniques.



        * "Plausible" does not mean just the most "probable" outcome of a
       change in history. You can write a plausible AH showing major changes
       caused by the actions of a person of improbable origin. This has
       happened in real history. Consider Napoleon, a Corsican who might not
       even have been French if there had been slight changes in history a
       few years before he was born.


        * To use a person who did not exist in real history to do improbable
       things, all you need to do is check that the cultural,
       socio-political and technological circumstances were so that such a
       person could make the changes. Indeed, for a plausible AH extending
       more than a few years beyond the POD, you should, like real history,
       include some unexpected world-altering individuals, and develop the
       socio-political environment that enables their actions to be
       believable.


          Also, don't forget the role of chance and luck in real history. A
        *
       plausible AH will include some of these elements. For example a storm
       blows an attack fleet off course, a major religious leader falls down
       the stairs and dies before delivering the word of God. Real history
       also has the message on Japanese military activity that sat on a
       shelf over the weekend before the Pearl Harbor attack, and Hitler's
       survival running though the WW I trenches.

   Return to start


   Plausibility checklist

   3.04 Checking the plausibility of your AH is mostly common sense. However
   you might want to think about a few specific checks on it. These could
   include:



        * An attempt to capture the socio-political and technological
       evolution of the era.


        * Avoiding extremes that contradict the socio-political and
       technological realities of the era. For example, an empire that lasts
       virtually forever, like year 2000 Rome, a "super superior empire"
       like the ficitional Draka who make no mistakes (stirring fiction but
       not very plausible), or a people rising from the ashes of defeat to
       dominate the world. If your AH claims any of these, you are going to
       have a lot of work to create a plausible explanation. Similarly, you
       can create a good looking AH empire or country on the map. But to
       make it plausible, you need to apply the same factors that made it
       possible for empires and countries to exist in real history.



        * Avoiding an isolated dramatic event, in isolation from
       socio-political and technological changes, as the means of creating
       major changes. For example Napoleon conquered much of Europe. Your AH
       would be implausible if you put a Napoleon syle Emperor in France 50
       years earlier and said he maide these conquests. The AH would lack
       the essential context of revolutionary popular enthusiasm and changes
       such as the Levee en Masse.


        * Avoiding the "easy erase" trap of removing something from real
       history that was the natural result of socio-political and
       technological developments. For example having an empire collapse
       without apparent reason or not forming, despite the presence of
       factors that make this by far the easiest course of action for people
       to take.


          Avoiding instant technology which is widely adopted despite
        *
       incompatable social context. For example having Roman steam engines
       without preparing the way with metallugry and machining skills that
       need to preceed the device, and without social changes to to the
       cheap labor market that made the Romans uniterested in labor saving
       technology.


        * Recognizing that if your AH covers more than a few years after your
       POD there will be a progressive accumulation of changes in peoples
       beliefs, socio-political and economic activities, and technology.


        * Recognizing that if you use historical personalities in your AH,
       they are plausible if they were born before the POD, but increasingly
       implausible as the time increases between the POD and their birth,
       with the implausibility increasing as their ancestors are directly
       related to the changes caused by the POD. In fiction we can use Nixon
       as a car salesman as a joke, for an AH of British America, but its
       not plausible at all.



        * Recognizing that we can discuss AH most clearly when we look at
       just a few years after a POD. When we go beyond that we have no idea
       what is plausible, except that it makes some logical sense to see AH
       as changed by a "ripple effect" of accumulated micro changes after
       the POD. A POD in modern high-communication society will propagate
       very rapidly. But the rate slows as we look further back in history,
       until we reach the pre-electronic world where local cultures were
       mainly isolated from the outside.


        * Recognizing when the "ripple effect" is strong. This would include
       eras when the composition of the elite population has direct
       consequences on politics. History is full of wars caused by dynastic
       disputes, and elites elbowing for more power. These events are most
       sensitive to microchange effects. During the pre-modern era of Latin
       Christiandom claimants to dynastic titles fought wars to their
       support their claims. The failure to have a male child could plunge
       society into war and lead to major shifts in political control. Its
       fun to write these AH's but they can soon become very complex. After
       the 17th century there was a gradual shift to sovereignty based on
       support of the population, and wars became more closely related to
       national interests, which reduced this "ripple effect."



        * Applying a rational concept of historical change. AFAIK nobody has
       ever been to an alternate world. We can make all sorts of speculation
       about a "ripple effect" producing explosive changes, because of chaos
       theory etc. But the only speculations of any possible value to us are
       those that are bounded by rationality. When we look at real history
       we observe that most changes are incremental rather than explosive,
       and can be explained by the effects of the interaction of many
       individual decisions. Human nature makes most people reasonably
       predictable in their behavior. They earn a living, have children etc.
       Personalities rarely radically transform. Napoleon had a personality
       that needed to gamble all on the single chance and was compelled to
       provide kingships for his relatives even when this sabotaged public
       support for the new governments. If we looked at him after a POD he
       would still have this personality, rather than a different one, such
       as where he transformed into a cautious conserver of his gains who
       built popular support for new kings with local roots. Technology
       permits some things at a particular time but not others. An ancient
       Roman tinkerer could not invent a steam engine one summer in the back
       room of a villa and revolutionize Roman industry.

   3.05 If you want further information on how to write a plausible AH, go
   to:


           http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/4123/main.htm#Alternate

   and follow the links to the plausibility essay.


   3.06 I have never seen an AH, including my own, that would get anything
   close to a perfect score on a plausibility rating. But a checklist like
   this helps to make them hold together better, and makes them more fun to
   discuss.

   Return to start


   Fictional AH's less plausible than our discussions


   3.07 Our discussion in soc.history.what-if has often produced AH's which
   succeed on many of of the plausibility points. Our best discussions deal
   with AH's that are far more plausible than the AH's used in fiction, where
   the test is not not so much historical plausibility, as it is the creation
   of a mood of living in an AH world. The fictional AH's that work best,
   such as Fatherland, The Man in the High Castle, Bring the Jubilee, and
   Pavanne, are generally weak in their historical plausibility.

   3.08 We discuss alternate history in soc.history.what-if to devise
   realistic, reasonable, even somewhat likely worlds based on a given POD,
   i.e. a plausible AH. However, the objective of fictional AH's is to
   function as part of an interesting story. This can conflict conflict with
   the aim of creating a plausible AH. Good AH fiction often has has gaps,
   improbabilities, and inconsistencies, that make them fail as plausible AH
   in by the standards we tend to apply in soc.history.what-if. Rather, they
   are usually improbable and sometimes impossible outcomes. For example, all
   plausible Draka timelines would destroy life on Earth. But an implausible
   one allows a creative writer to create a fascinating speculative fictional
   world.


   3.09 Our Charter permits discussion of the Draka world as an AH, but
   extreme improbability means that most discussion of Draka would be best
   done on rec.arts.sf.written or the web site at
           http://www.mindspring.com/~atalbott/index.html

   Return to start


   Authentic sounding names for persons in your AH

   3.10 Try using authentic sounding names for persons in your AH after the
   POD era generation has been replaced by new ones. You can draw on the
   names in the "Onomastikon" (Dictionary of Names) compiled by Kate Monk and
   published at:


           http://www.fairacre.demon.co.uk/index.htm

   Kate Monk collected names from many countries and periods from ancient
   Egypt to modern times, to help provide names for live role-players. It
   includes male and female first names or personal names and surnames. It
   also has some historical background.


   Return to start


   What is plausible technological change?

   3.11 Technological change, as mentioned above, should be plausible.
   However, you can do a plausible AH where science and technology differ
   considerably from the real world. Bear in mind that changes in science and
   technology are very complex. Nothing happens in isolation. A change in
   science or technology at a POD requires changes before the POD that make
   it possible for the change to work. For example you can't introduce a
   steam engine without first showing a history of preceding technological
   development in metal fabrication, machining and instrumentation. In
   addition to showing the development of the knowledge required to make a
   science or technology change, your AH should deal with the natural
   consequences of the change, including further discoveries and
   applications. If a society invents and adopts steam engines, power source
   development will not stop there, even if it does not follow the pattern of
   real history. Here are some tips to help your technological arguments.



        * Similar societies have about the same rate of technological change.
       A single discovery, no matter how fundamental, will usually fail to
       transform a the long-term development of a society. A dramatic change
       in a society's rate of technological development needs a dramatic
       change in society itself. You can achieve this by designing an AH
       where the working population drops and there is a demand for labor
       saving machines, as it did in Europe in the 14th century. Or you can
       replace a restrictive government that discourages entrepreneurialism
       and science, such as inquisitorial Spain, with a one that encourages
       dynamic centers of learning, as occurred in Holland in the 17th
       century. Or you can inject new wealth into a society ready to
       innovate to make profits, as occurred in England in the 18th century.


        * However, it is much easier to design an AH to retard rather than
       advance the rate of technological change. The bulk of technology
       relies on previous discoveries being completed. A big speedup of a
       specific technology will hit barriers as it runs beyond the
       prerequisite components that need to be developed by other
       technologies. In real history many "crash projects" have failed
       because they have run beyond available inputs. The project members
       then have to develop an incredible range of related technologies
       before they can advance in the project. A project that attempts to
       create a wide range of technologies quickly reaches the point of
       diminishing returns fairly quickly. Consider the simple example of
       the person in a Roman villa inventing a steam engine. They have to
       develop the full range of technologies for making high quality steel,
       boring cylinders (a technology developed in real history to bore
       cannons), making regulatory controls (a technology developed by
       scientists in real history ] to develop instrumentation to measure
       the real world) etc. The problem of a technology before its time is
       becomes worse as the technologies become more sophisticated.



        * As returns diminish, wastage increases. A society with a huge
       increase in its research budget must be able to afford to throw away
       a lot of money. An unavoidable economic consequence of major crash
       research programs (those that consume a significant share of Gross
       National Product, a measure of economic wealth) as demonstrated by
       military research during the Cold War, is that they drain money from
       the economy, and lower economic growth.


        * It's difficult to design an AH that plausibly "deletes" a
       technology entirely is hard. It is rarely sufficient to remove the
       person credited with a discovery. Except in ancient times, when there
       was little technological change anyway, discoveries are usually the
       result of the work of many people. Also, most of the major scientific
       and technological discoveries were the evident goals to people who
       had observed previous development. The achievement of most
       discoveries is by perseverance in seeking to reach these goals. As
       time after the previous development increases, the nature of the next
       discovery becomes more and more obvious. Your AH can delay
       discoveries, but the longer you delay them, the more likely the it is
       that some researcher will make the breakthrough.


          Many technologies have alternatives. This is particularly so for
       core technologies such as power generation, electronics, weapons,
       fuels, and transport and propulsion systems for land, air, sea and
       space. For example, in real history petroleum replaced coal as the
       major fuel because it was more efficient and less costly. If the oil
       industry had been delayed we would have developed alternatives, such
       as alcohol fueled engines. They have lower performance but are still
       useful enough for to develop an early 20th century level auto
       industry. As petroleum was developed as a source for gasoline, it
       would displace alcohol fueled engines. A key point is that the fact
       that a certain technology dominates usage in real history usually
       means that the alternatives are more costly and less efficient,
       rather than non-existent.



        * Wishful thinking does not make a feasible technology. An AH based
       on a theoretically possible technology can fail if it is not
       practically feasible. There are many "maybe" technologies, such as
       Maglev trains, turbine autos, and dynasoar space planes, that were
       never seriously implemented in real history because they would worked
       poorer and were more costly than their optimistic supporters
       predicted, or would take an excessive development time and money
       before the problems could be solved and they could be incorporated
       into working real-world systems. Dream technology for space travel or
       computers that would have made an AH better than the real world is
       particularly suspect. Before you incorporate dream technology in your
       AH, consider the credibility of its advocates. Often they have an axe
       to grind with the owners of the existing technology and have a vested
       interest in the dream technology. Or they are simply impractical
       dreamers who ignore the difficulties inherent in the technology. The
       technologies used in the real world, whether today or 2000 years ago,
       are the ones which met the practical needs of society. When you find
       a technology that was not used in real history, find the reason why
       it was not used. If you want to introduce the technology, design your
       AH so that reason does not exist. For example if you want a Roman
       steam engine, you will have to create demand for labor saving
       machinery. You would have to transform Roman society from one of
       cheap labor to one of labor shortage. An initial step would be to
       abolish slavery. However this is easier said than done, and you would
       also need to make a lot of other social changes.

   Return to start


   Ancient technolology


   3.12 Ancient technolology. An early, and vivid fictional AH proposed that
   as an alternative to the collapse of the Roman Empire and the onset of the
   "Dark Ages" a time-traveller would arrive in Rome and introduced twentieth
   century technology. This was L. Sprague de Camp's 1939 novel, Lest
   Darkness Fall. The hero introduces one invention after another, transforms
   Rome and prevents the Fall. But you can make your what-if operate within
   the realm of plausibility. Consider the classic AH of the Roman steam
   engine:


        * The Romans were good at technological development, by taking
       existing basic concepts and improving them where it was sufficiently
       desired and cost-effective. However they were not technical
       innovators.



        * Would the Romans be interested in developing a steam engine. It is
       of primary value as a labor saving machine. But the romans had a glut
       of slaves and Plebs. Consider cost-effectivness. Supply and demand
       meant that there was nothing to be gained by developing machinery for
       anything except toys and spectacles (temple doors etc). The Romans
       were practical to the extreme and limited R&D to where they needed
       it--cement, good plumbing (great baths are practical from the point
       of view of the user).


        * Until the mid-19th century, with the advances in Chemistry,
       technology has developed independently of science. Practical
       measurements and iterative tests--often extremely unsafe--were used
       instead of mathematical modelling to develop things such as early
       cannon and steam engines. Check out how, for example, James Watt
       perfected the steam engine (1775).


          The geometry that the Romans used in their construction was
       sufficient for this project. They knew about Euclid's "Elements" of
       geometry and there was no shortage of Greek teachers to explain the
       finer points.



        * However, it would have been beyond Roman ability to make a working
       steam engine until they developed a boring mill to manufacture
       cylinders. This technology was developed in Europe to make better
       cannon. So Roman development of a working steam engine--as opposed to
       a Hero's ball that spins by venting steam--would have depended on
       improving their seige machinery by developing something that fired
       through tubes. Gunpowder is not essential. The key is precision
       matching of the tube and projectile diameters. Seems like there is a
       possibility here for a good AH!


        * The creative AH designer might find another reason for the Romans
       to develop a boring mill than to make cannon.



        * Alternatively, the AH designer might have the Romans stick to
       rotation, and develop a steam turbine. However, this would have its
       own requirements: including balancing and reliable, effective
       bearings.


        * Either way, they'd have to perfect fairly high-quality steel.


          Given several centuries the Romans could solve these problems. But
        *
       the AH designer must motivate the Romans to do so by making labor
       much more expensive relative to machinery.

   Return to start


   Medieval Islamic science and technology

   3.13 Medieval Islamic science and technology. Early Islamic science from
   the 9th to 13th centuries was a rare combination of means and opportunity.
   Al-Khwarizmi, Ibn Sina, Ibn al-Haitham are examples of excellent science
   during the early Muslim era. Their researches were not developed by later
   generations because of a whole complex of reasons, ranging from the
   Mongol/Timurid shattering of the intellectual culture in Bagdhad, to
   increasing control by Islamic legalists. Reasons for the success and
   collapse of Islamic science suggest AH's in which Islam modernizes rather
   than stagnates.


   Return to start


   Early Modern Western science and technology

   3.14 Early Modern Western science and technology. My impression has been
   for some time that quantification is the key to understanding why the West
   developed modern science and technology while neither Islam nor China did.
   I note in this regard a recent book by Alfred W. Crosby, The Measure of
   Reality: Quantification and Western Society, 1250-1600 (see my mini review
   in section 3.02) argues along somewhat similar lines.


   3.15 In particular I argue that analytic geometry, and instrumentation are
   key factors in Europe's scientific revolution. First, analytic geometry:


        * As early as the third century A.D. the Chinese developed
       geometrical propositions in algebraic form and described geometrical
       figures by algebraic equations. The Muslims acquired these techniques
       when al-Khwarizmi was the Kalif's ambassador to Khazaria.



        * But neither the Chinese nor the Muslims went on to develop analytic
       geometry, which can reference every geometical object and every
       geometric operation. This was first done by Pierre Fermat and Rene
       Descartes in the 17th century, when Western scientists began applying
       mathematics to every aspect of the physical world.

   3.16 As for instrumentation and mathematics, consider a few examples:



        * Huygens patented the first pendulum clock in 1656. This gave the
       first reasonably accuracte time measurements. The pendulum clock was
       based on Huygens theory of evolutes, specifically the cycloid. The
       mathematical theory and the mechanical applications developed in
       parallel. Other curves also had a "mechanical" equivalent, such as
       the tractrix -- the curve traced by one end of a rod when the other
       end is dragged along a line perpendicular to the initial position of
       the rod. Mathematics also solved the problems of developing optics. 
          A good example of the 17th century quantification of natural
        *
       phenomena is the development of thermometers and the mathematical
       understanding of the expansion of air as its heat increases.


        * No other culture independently developed scientific instrumentation
       to match what was developed in Europe from the 17th century onwards,
       or made mathematical calculations with detailed quantification of of
       temperatures, pressures, chemical reactions, produced by scientific
       hypothesis, observation and experiment.

   3.17 My quantification and instrumentaion argument for the Western
   scientific revolution requires a few important qualifications:



        * The 17th century scientific revolution consisted of work by people
       attempting a variety of goals. Some were pure alchemy and magic,
       rather than the observation of and experimention on the real world
       that we recognize as "science." Some of the best scientific results
       were byproducts of projects that did not have "scientific" goals.


        * Part of the 17th century scientific revolution was experimental
       science, part was abstract scientific method, part was the systematic
       application of instrumentation techniques (optics, measuring
       devices). Sometimes they came together in the quantification and
       sometimes they developed independently.



        * Sociological, religious, economic and other non-technical reasons
       were as important as the sequence of technical developments, which I
       characterized as the "mathematization of science," in causing the
       17th century scientific revolution. None of the explanations can be
       extracted from the complex of causes.

   3.18 Some of our most interesting what-ifs deal with postulated failure of
   the European scientific revolution and its possible development by Islamic
   or Chinese scientists.


   Return to start


   The English Industrial Revolution

   3.19. The English Industrial Revolution. The 17th century scientific
   revolution was not the key factor leading to the 18th century industrial
   revolution in England, which developed mainly from hands on "technics" --
   techniques learned by trial and error. The matching of the results of the
   17th century scientific revolution with the industrial revolution came
   initially in the application of the scientific instrument making
   techniques to machines that required pressure and temperature regulator
   and monitoring devices. Only later stages of the industrial revolution
   required extensive use of the results of the 17th century scientific
   revolution. This occured, for example, in the chemistry of synthethic dyes
   in the second half of the 19th century.


   Return to start


   Contemporary technology

   3.20 Contemporary technology. Beware if your AH goes from a technology
   equivalent to real history's 1950s to orbital ramjets in a decade and Mars
   colonies in three decades. This is fair game for fiction, such as S.
   Sterling's The Stone Dogs, which was based on this premise. However, if
   you want people to take your what-if seriously, you won't fall into the
   trap of super easy to achieve high technology.


          There will be a separate note to help AH designers attempt
       technological developments that are higher-tech than real history, or
       are high-tech in ways not developed in real history.


   Return to start


   4. Getting other people to discuss your AH

   4.01 You are going to get a better reception for your AH if the POD and
   the subsequent history are somewhat plausible.


   4.02 Read recent AH articles with similar topic titles before posting. Do
   not post the same AH as someone else. Nobody will be interested in an
   instant replay. Try to contribute something new. Send personal notes of
   support directly to the appropriate person.

   4.03 Do not be intimidated by concern that your depth of historical
   knowlege may be far less than that of some of the people who have posted
   very detailed information. Just use common sense, be prepared to do a
   little basic research, apply the following easy steps, and you will do
   just fine. Ready? Let's start:


   Return to start


   Use a descriptive Subject line

   4.04 Use a descriptive Subject line. "What if there was a big change in
   history," or "Question for WI I'm thinking about," or "Nika" are not
   likely to attract readers. Omit the words "what-if" or WI from the subject
   line. This is redundant as this is the what-if newsgroup.


   Return to start


   Organize your presentation

   4.05 Organize your presentation:



        * Begin with a sentence that expands your Subject line enough so that
       readers understand what you are trying to do.


        * Explain what actually happened in real history. This is unnecessary
       for events that are very well known such as dropping the Atomic Bomb
       on Hiroshima in 1945. 


          Explain what might have happened. This is your POD and what made it
        *
       happen differently than real history. Don't just ask a question, such
       as "what if Germany won WW I?" without giving some hint as to how and
       why this happened. A good WI will give a plausible explanation, such
       as how the Germans were able to break through in their 1914 advance
       to Paris. Do some research and think before posting your WI. No
       explanation = rude and lazy.


        * What are the immediate results of your POD. Don't just ask a
       question such as "what if Caesar stayed home on the Ides March and
       was not assassinated?" without giving some hint as as to what what
       you think would happen. Do some research and think before posting
       your WI. A whatif with no explanation tells people that you are rude
       and lazy.


        * What are the short-term results. This starts your timeline after
       your POD. Don't just list a series of events.Try to explain why you
       consider each event will occur, or at least some historical
       expanation of why things will move in this direction.



        * What are the consequences for the next year or so.


        * What are the longer term consequences.



        * You can offer a single AH or suggest several possibilities.


        * These points are merely to help you organize your thoughts. You do
       not have to write them down or use all of them. Some historical
       events are so well known that an explanation of real history is
       unnecessary. But you will get more of a response if you err on the
       side of explaining enough real world history around your POD and AH
       to allow readers to understand the difference from real history and
       comment without having to duplicate your research. Of course, we hope
       that they will check their facts, or be already knowlegeable about
       the era and event, before they jump in with a detailed critique.


   Return to start

   Consider using names for your AH people 


   4.06 Consider adding something extra to your WI, such as using names for
   your AH people, instead of always just saying "the British did this" and
   then "the Romans did that."


        * When you identify historical personages by name and deal with their
       actions after the POD, you could put their name in a special bracket.
       For example you could say that:


           "Washington defeated the British during the Revolutionary War.
           As president, #Washington# served three terms before his
           assasination by the Copperplate Society."


        * You could similarly identify made up personages in your AH:


           "In 1943, Chinese Emperor #Xuanzang# marked the 100th
           anniversary of the defeat of the British in the Opium War."

   Return to start



   Format your text so people can read it no matter what newsreader they are
   using

   4.07 Format your text so people can read it no matter what newsreader they
   are using.


        * Use a blank line between paragraphs,



        * Do not use lines longer than 66 characters.

   This is 66 characters:


   ******************************************************************

   If you type longer lines this causes problems when people quote your text
   -- If your WI is popular they will do this -- and after this happens two
   or three times in replies, the ">>>" characters will push lines off the
   right edge of the screen.


   This will not affect you if you have a screen larger than the standard
   VT-100 terminal.

   But many readers are limited to the small screen and their newsreaders
   will "wrap" the text before 80 characters. This means that if your
   original line length was longer than about 66 characters, such as the
   following two lines


   ***************************************************************************

   ***************************************************************************


   they would be "wrapped" by Ima Betterhistorian's wuote of your post. When
   you check your post you will see this, even if you have a big screen

   Ima Historian (Imahistorian@history.com) wrote:


   >
   *************************************************************************

   > **


   >
   *************************************************************************

   > ** You will be further frustrated when you see what Superhistorian did
   to your text in qutoting it:


   Ima Betterhistorian (123@historic.edu) writes:

   > Ima Historian (Imahistorian@history.com) wrote:


   >>
   ************************************************************************

   >> *


   >> **

   >>
   ************************************************************************


   >> *

   >> ** This completly garbles your AH.


   For maximum readability, hit the RETURN key before 66 characters.

   Return to start


   "Double blind" AHs


   4.08 Be cautious in posting a "double blind" AH. This works only when
   people recognize it for what it is. A "double blind" AH is one where you
   pretend to be an inhabitant an alternate history, and post in persona of a
   person of an AH who is trying to guess what happens in real history.

   4.09 At least one "double blind" AH discussion has been held on
   soc.history.what-if. This was posts from an advanced tropical civilization
   where savants discussed the possibilities that primitive Europe might have
   developed civilization and the shambling natives might have crawled off
   the icebergs.


   4.10 If you wish to venture a "double blind" AH you would be wise to put a
   little warning at the start of your posts, such as "ATTENTION: DOUBLE
   BLIND AH, YOU MUST POST FROM THE AH TO COMMENT ON THE WI." This might help
   to reduce misunderstandings and possible bad feelings.

   Return to start



   5. Avoiding problems

   5.01 O.K. you have posted your WI and now you are happy to see replies to
   it! Lets find out how to avoid problems.


   Return to start


   Prepare to defend your assertions

   5.02 Prepare to defend your assertions. Don't base your support of your WI
   on popular knowledge, such as Hollywood movies, or the basic textbook
   approved by your state or national government.


   Return to start


   Learn how to deal with difficult people

   5.03 Learn how to deal with difficult people:


          Usenet is an entirely open medium. Anybody can read this group and
       post to it. This means that we will occasionally see trolls
       (outrageous postings to provoke a naive replies), flames, and
       off-topic posts. The best way to deal with these posts is usually to
       ignore them. If you see repeated and significant violation of the
       Charter you can send a polite email to the offender, perhaps with a
       copy to the postmaster at their site.



        * If you personally object to a poster or subject, most news readers
       allow the use of a Kill-file to block out undesirable postings. Refer
       to the FAQ posted in news.software.readers.

   Return to start


   Make your comments readable


   5.04 Make your comments readable:


        * Edit text that you quote. Try to have no more quoted text than new
       text. People hate to read a text again and again. Try to quote only
       what you respond to. Mark deletions with three dots or a square
       bracket showing [cut] or [snip] or a square bracketed short summary
       of what you deleted, if you need to show context is important. Never
       quote large amounts of text and add "Agree" or "me too" at the
       bottom. Remove signatures and other personal items from quotes, but
       include a proper attribution note at the beginning, i.e. Ima
       Betterhistorian (123@historic.edu) writes:



        * If you change the topic of a thread, or if it has drifted far from
       the Subject header line, revise the Subject line and add "(was: old
       subject)" to your new subject.

   Return to start


   Do not cross-post 


   5.05 Do not cross-post (post to more than one newsgroup):


        * Unfortunately Usenet permits unlimited crossposting. At the very
       least this leads to different threads on the same topic in different
       newgroups frustrates.


        * If you want to discuss a published AH story, post to
       rec.arts.sf.written only. Otherwise, soc.history.what-if will be
       flooded with time wasting debates on enjoyment issues and peripheral
       discussions such as how the movie made form the story is, or is not,
       politically correct, e.g. one of the current Starship Troopers
       threads. There is a limited exemption to the soc.history.what-if ban
       on discussion of published stories. This is for speculation about how
       the history created in the published story would work as an alternate
       history. Note that this only applies to past history. Speculations
       about future history should go to alt.history.future.



        * Think (at least) twice before cross-posting your AH. Every time a
       post to the major newsgroups in the alt, rec.arts, soc.culture,
       heirarchy, or argumentative groups such as alt.revisionism or
       talk.politics.guns, includes soc.history.what-if in the crosspost
       list we are visited with another infestation of cranks, nuts, nazis,
       trollsters and spammers.


        * Do not cross post your AH to soc.history.ancient or
       soc.history.medieval, which have Charter exclusion of what-ifs.



        * More importantly, do not cross post to soc.culture.china or other
       soc.culture groups where your post will attact all sorts of fanatics
       who will bombard our group with their views on how to resolve current
       political issues. Consider the consequences if your post ends up as
       part of the discussion on the follwing crosspost line (taken from a
       post to soc.history):

           Newsgroups: soc.culture.pakistan,soc.culture.punjab,
           soc.culture.indian,soc.culture.indian.delhi,
           soc.culture.indian.gujarati,soc.culture.indian.marathi,
           soc.culture.tamil,soc.culture.bengali,soc.history


   Return to start


   Dealing with crossposted trolls 

   5.06 If you see an obvious crossposted troll to soc.history.what-if you
   might help remove the thread from soc.history.what-if by using the
   following strategy:


      If you must respond to the original posting, please do so in
   soc.history.what-if alone. Trim your headers and do not crosspost.



    * If you want to respond in the other newsgroups I suggest that you
   respond in separate posts. The original message will then be trimmed so
   that it will henceforward be addressed to only a single newsgroup.


    * In that way, somebody reading a flame invitation in the other newsgroup
   will respond only in that newsgroup and leave soc.history.what-if out of
   it. The content of your comment in the other newsgroups is at your
   discretion, but I would note that the more it rejects the trollster's
   idea, the more likely it will attract the rest of the discussion on the
   thread, which may then proceed in blissful ignorance of the fact that
   soc.history.what-if has disappeared from the newsgroup line.



    * This advice works for most trollsters, who are not focused on details.
   Regrettably there are a few ultra-trolsters who re-add trimmed newsgroups
   to the crosspost line.

   Return to start


   Do not encourage "Holocaust deniers" to argue their views


   5.07 Understand how to deal with historical truth as an issue, and prevent
   Nazis who infest Usenet from making you a sucker:


        * Alt.revisionism, rather than soc.history.what-if, is the place for
       debates on the truth of the commonly accepted historical record. Our
       Charter enables us to discuss alternative histories in which events
       differ from the known historical record, rather than denials of the
       truth of the commonly accepted historical record, such as the type
       known as "Holocaust denial." 

        * Alternate history operates on the assumption that the commonly
       accepted historical record is substantially accurate.


        * Secret history is dedicated to revising the commonly accepted
       historical record. It is incompatible with alternate history. In
       partiular we have seen many posts by a few persons who deny that the
       Holocaust happened, or that a faulty historical record over reports
       it. In this insance, secret history accepts an alternate history as
       the truth rather than the commonly accepted historical record. This
       discussion is suitable for alt.revisionism but not for
       soc.history.what-if.



        * However, the soc.history.what-if Charter does allow discussion of
       "what if the Holocaust had never happened." Anyone posing this WI
       should beware of the infestation of Holocaust deniers that it will
       pull out of the woodwork. Similarly discussion of WI's in which a
       post WW II Nazi Germania managed to suppress knowledge of the
       Holocaust (as in the AH postulated in the novel Fatherland, will
       probably encourage the fans of secret history to reinvade
       soc.history.what-if.


        * To sum up, a valid AH for soc.history.what-if cannot claim that
       events which demonstrably happened in real history, such as the
       Holocaust, didn't happen in real history. But a valid AH for
       soc.history.what-if may ask how the world would have been had the
       Holocaust, or other event denied by believers in secret history, had
       not happened.


   Return to start


   Do not engage in "fanish" discussion of published AH fiction

   5.08 Do not engage in "fanish" discussion of published AH fiction:


      If you are interested in adventures in published fictional worlds, role
    *
   playing games and sci-fi and other fantastic entertainments, such as "1984
   vs Draka" or "President RELee vs the Borgyou" can pursue your interest in
   alt.worldsaway, rec.games.frp.misc, rec.arts.sf.written,
   alt.fan.[authorsname], or at web sites dedicated to the published fiction
   of individual authors such as Steve Stirling's Draka at
   http://www.mindspring.com/~atalbott/index.html


    * Unfortunately there is no specific alternate history rpg newsgroup. I
   would encourage rpg fans to create alt.games.frp.alt-hist.


    * If you are a fan of the excellent GURPS Alternate Earths please post on
   rec.games.frp.gurps.



    * As noted above our Charter does not prohibit discussion of historical
   possibilities merely because they have been used in published fiction. Our
   charter permits speculation about how the history created in the published
   story would work as an alternate history. For example Harry Turtledove's
   published AH stories, the Agent of Byzantium series, is based on the
   interesting POD of Muhammed becoming a Christian and develops an AH that
   envisions a flourishing Byzantine Empire. But other published AH's are
   extremely improbabile, which means that most discussion of them would be
   best done on rec.arts.sf.written. 


    * The Charter also allows discussion of how well the possibilites of the
   AH are realized in the published fiction. But the Charter draws the line
   at discussion of the cardboard nature of the characters, their limited
   viewpoint, dramatic tension or other aspects of the author's writing
   technique such as "enjoyably nasty stuff," or "easy to pull a deus ex
   machina out of a hat," or "[author's name] ended up unreadable." (Quotes
   from the "1984 Vs. The Draka" thread.)


   Return to start


   Do not engage in discussion of future history

   5.09 Do not engage in discussion of future history:


      Note that this only applies to past history. Speculations about future
    *
   history should go to alt.history.future.

   Return to start


   Do not post binaries

   5.10 Use binaries appropriately:



        * You may reach the stage where you have a great picture or map to
       add life to your WI.


        * But do not post binaries in soc.history.what-if. They belong only
       in the hierarchies explicitly intended for them. The reason for this
       is to allow news servers with limited resources to avoid these (very
       expensive) postings. You can post your binary to to a binary
       newsgroup or put it on a web site and post a reference in
       soc.history.what-if.


   Return to start


   Read the Charter

   5.11 Read the Charter. It's short.


   Return to start


   6. Text of the charter of soc.history.what-if

   6.01 The following is the text of the charter of soc.history.what-if as
   approved by vote reported on May 16, 1995:


   --[start quote]------------------------------------------------

   CHARTER


   The soc.history.what-if newsgroup will be open to discussion of alternate
   history. This is "what-ifs" regarding specific historical events.

   Specifically, but not exclusively:



        * Historical events - what could have happened if they had been
       different?
          How could this have happened differently (i.e. discussion of how
        *
       the divergence could have occurred, not of what its consequences
       would be.)

   Note: the following topics are not to be discussed:


          Revisionism regarding the Holocaust or Turkish/Armenian massacres
       (post to alt.revisionism). "What if the Holocaust had not happened?"
       is a legitimate question

        * Future history - "What if the President were assassinated
       tomorrow?"

        * Alternate history in fictional worlds - "What if Luke had failed to
       destroy the Death Star?"


   --[end quote]------------------------------------------------

   There is no charter for alt.history.what-if, the newsgroup that according
   to the CFV was supposed to disappear. The rationale circulated with the
   CFV is as follows:


   --[start quote]------------------------------------------------

   RATIONALE


   alt.history.what-if is a thriving newsgroup. It has a reasonable posting
   level, a well-maintained FAQ (thank you, Robert Schmunk), and a good
   signal-to-noise level (no ad hominems, only a few flames before a recent
   flamewar that seems to have stayed in one thread, and is dying).

   But it's on alt.*. Lots of people can't get alt.*. (Lots of .ac.uk sites
   for a start). So I propose we move it to soc.*


   There are several other soc.history.* groups, and it will fit well into
   that hierarchy.

   If this CFV passes, a proposal will be made for alt.history.what-if to be
   rmgrouped. I appreciate that alt.* groups never truly die, but I hope that
   it will disappear from most sites.


   --[end quote]-------------------------------------------------

   The following is quoted from the announcement of the vote results:


   --[start quote]------------------------------------------------

   There were 166 YES votes and 45 NO votes, for a total of 211 valid votes.
   There were 3 abstains and 4 invalid ballots.


   For group passage, YES votes must be at least 2/3 of all valid (YES and
   NO) votes. There also must be at least 100 more YES votes than NO votes.

   --[end quote]-------------------------------------------------


   You may obtain the complete archive from:

   ftp://ftp.uu.net/usenet/news.announce.newgroups/soc/soc.history.what-if


   Return to start


   7. Credits and thanks


   7.01 Thanks to Ian (iadmontg@undergrad.math.uwaterloo.ca) for the notes I
   used to draft section 3.11 Technological change. Also for suggestions from
   Cambias (cambias@heliograph.com), Captain Button (button@crl.crl.com),
   Coyu (coyu@aol.com), Stan Engel (thorisporn@worldnet.att.net), Andrew S
   Goldstein (Andrew@world.std.com), Philip Masters (Phil@philm.demon.co.uk),
   Craig J Neumeier (neume001@maroon.tc.umn.edu), Gavin Weaire
   (weaire@students.uiuc.edu).


   Return to start


   7. Copyright notice


   Copyright © (C) 1997, 1998, Donald H. Tucker. You may copy all or part of

   this document on the condition that it is not edited and the copy includes

   the entire contents of at least one major section. The Introduction
   preceding section 1, including the Table of Contents, and this copyright

   notice, must remain intact in your copy. An HTML version of this document

   is maintained at the Pteranodon's View website at URL:

           http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/4123/main.htm



   Links to Other Sections of Pteranodon's View


   This is a summary jump table to other parts of the alternate history
   sections of the website. To reach the complete jump table (table of
   contents, book reviews, global history, timelines, genealogy, immigrant
   cultures etc.) please go to the main page:


    Click on box label to    to major    covered by  Petranodon's view
    __________   jump        topics      __________  __________   __________
                 __________  __________

    Pteranodon's Table of    Meet the    Read/Send
    main page    Contents    Author      Comments

    Alternate                Plausible   Newsgroup   Non-fiction  My What-if
    History      AH Main     AH Writing  Posting FAQ AH Books     Scenarios
    Intro


   If you enjoyed the page, would like to offer suggestions for improvement,
   or want to discuss any of the issues please send me an e-mail at 
   pteranodon@geocities.com. Thanks.




                               ____,__==@~~__,____
                                ^^^\#\#[#]#/#/^^^
                                      _/|\_

                                      "   " ©1996, 1998


   All the material with this page is copyright © 1998 by Donald H. Tucker,
   except where otherwise specified, and may not be reprinted in whole or in
   part, or stored, or transmitted by any means, including electronic,
   without the prior consent of the owner, except for individual or
   educational uses. You may make single copies without modification for
   personal research or study. Anything used should be given the appropriate
   citation. All commercial use, transmission and reproduction of this site,
   without my written permission, is strictly prohibited.

                                        Pteranodon logo Copyright © 1996, 1998
                                          Page last modified November 24, 1998




                          PLEASE LINK ONLY TO MAIN PAGE.
                     I CHANGE OTHER PAGE TITLES AND CONTENT.






            This page hosted by Geocities Get your own Free Home Page


   IMAGE1
