Transition Points 

I have thought somewhat about the pseudo science of transition pints and transition lines.

Things I am clear on (though open to change)

Transition Lines are the paths of stress created by a very subtle gravitional/other field 
that acts much like two bubbles that have been connected and then pulled apart. The bubbles 
remain connected by a 3-dimensional tunnel. As the tunnel narrows down the walls get stronger 
and harder to interpenetrate. The point along the tunnel at which the tunnel wall becomes 
strong enough to detect in normal space using special instruments is now as the transition event 
plane (scholarly) or transition point (colloquially).

It is possible (though of lower probability) to have a transition tunnel with three or more
end points. They usually connect star systems but it is theorectically possible to have
a break in the transition tunnel that leaves both ends dangling. It is also possible to break 
out of a tansition early by changing the stringth of the drive. Not a good idea..

The transition drive is really a field generator that allows the ship to engage in a sessile
effect on the surface of the tunnel in an manner that is described as "inertialess". In reality 
it involves a drastic lowering of inertia, not a removal. The actual impetus for the transition 
comes from the initial velocity of the vessel. The path taken within the tunnel is governed by the 
approach vector and mass of the vessel combined with the strength of the transition drive's field.

In theory a multiple transition drive engagement on the same tunnel at the same time could alter the 
exit vectors drastically but there are practical problems with doing it.

Real time does elapse though the senses are not reliable during that time period. There are a few 
Terrans/Proximans/Alphans that are actually capable of acting within that period of sensory suspension.

So the real limiting factors in determining where a transition point is located is dependent on the 
technology used to detect it. 

There appear to be no visible adverse affects. But transition drives are stillin their infancy and 
data is just now being gathered.

Transition points do seem to vary over timethough the scale is geologic in nature. They dissapear and appear 
as well as move.

How do transition points effect trade?  

The Confed is going through a growth and expansion path similar to that of the united states at 
the turn of the century. Many areas have stagecoach but the farthest as only accessible via clipper ship.
Local goods rule for many situations or are only traded within a 2-3 jump radius. High technology items and 
luxuries are shipped far distances but at great expense.

Is there enough shipping bandwidth to force markets to specialize?  

Yes. Within various subregions. Only the Confed Core worlds enjoy that specialisation across many markets 
almost universally.