


   Return to Return to Articles
   Throttle!
                        Guidelines for World Creation

                                by Rich Staats



             Click here for a word from the author.


             Click here for the author's home page.

             1) Overview:


             The document is divided into four major sections.

             We will begin with a purpose statement and move
             onto look at definitions which will be germane in

             the remainder of the document. Next we will look at

             the organization of the document, and then we will
             describe two procedures for creation of a fantasy

             Role-Playing world.


             The name of the game in Role-Playing for the

             referee is creating a world where the players can
             suspend disbelief. The techniques described in this

             document will aid you in achieving this objective. 

             2) Purpose:


             to teach two methods for the development of fantasy

             Role-Playing worlds. 

             3) Definitions:


              1. Role-Playing: (We will use Schick's definition

                 for the purposes of this document.) 

                    *Gygax in Role-Playing Mastery: "Acting out

                     a make-believe position" 

                     Costikyan in Toon: "Role-Playing is just
                    *
                     'Let's Pretend'" 


                    *Schick in Heroic Worlds: "Quantified
                     Interactive Storytelling" 


              2. Character: The role a player assumes when
                 playing a Role-Playing game. 


              3. Adventure: A Role-Playing session or series of

                 sessions using the same characters throughout
                 with definite beginning, middle and ending. 


              4. Campaign: A series of connected sessions where
                 the characters accomplish something which could

                 not have been done in one adventure. 


              5. Fantasy Role-Playing (FRP): Role-Playing which
                 takes place in a fantasy milieu. 


              6. Fantasy Role-Playing World: The environment in
                 which the characters interact. It has a

                 consistent set of physical laws and a coherent

                 mythical order. 

              7. Cross-Over: Travel from one Role-Playing milieu

                 to another. 

              8. Multi-verse: Set of all Role-Playing

                 worlds/milieu's possible for characters to

                 enter from a particular campaign. (Note: these
                 worlds do not have to all be run by the same

                 referee.) 


              9. Party: A group of characters involved in a
                 campaign who travel through the Role-Playing

                 world together with a common set of goals and

                 objectives. 

             10. PC: Player Character, a character controlled by

                 a player 

             11. NPC: Non-Player Character, a character

                 controlled by the referee 

             12. Tie-In: Connecting two plot threads or regions

                 that were not previously related. 


             13. Maguffin: a plot device or thread specifically
                 designed to incite player interest. 


             4) Organization of the remainder of the document:


              1. References and Supplies Helpful for World

                 Creation 

              2. Bottom-Up World Creation 


              3. Top-Down World Creation 

              4. Organizing the FRP World 


              5. Conclusion 

             5) References and Supplies:


             A) References (This is a list of useful resources

             for world creation, but the list is not designed to

             be exhaustive. Many of these sources were
             referenced in preparing this document.): 


                 Role-Playing Mastery by Gary Gygax 
                *

                *Master of the Game by Gary Gygax 

                 Heroic Worlds by Lawrence Schick 
                *

                *Campaign Law by ICE 

                 Best of White Dwarf Articles (Vols. I & II) by
                *
                 GW 


                *World Builder's Handbook by DGP 

                *Fantasy Wargaming by Bruce Galloway 


                *Different Worlds (Most volumes 1 to 20) 

                *Beast Enterprises' publications: TS, etc. 


                *The Art of War in the Middle Ages by C.W.C.
                 Oman 

                 War from the Stone Age to Alexander the Great
                *
                 by Arther Ferrill 

                *Powers and Perils by AH 


                *Landscape: Physical Geography by Marsh and
                 Dozier 


                *Contending Theories of International Relations
                 by Dougherty and Pfaltzgraff 


                *The Oxford History of Medieval Europe by George
                 Holmes 


                *Traveller and Megatraveller by GDW 

                *Glorantha, Land of Ninja and Vikings by

                 Chaosium/AH 

                 Quest World by Chaosium 
                *

                *Many GURPS supplements by SJG 

                 A good Atlas 
                *

                *A good Dictionary 


             B) Supplies:


                *Notebook - a nice, well bound notebook which
                 you can carry around with you and jot down

                 ideas as they occur to you. 

                 Three-Ring Binder - a place to organize your
                *
                 sketches, maps, and articles you copy and save 


                *Paper Punch - to prepare items for inclusion in
                 your three ring binder 


                *Camera - to take pictures of items that catch
                 your eye with respect to world building/design 


                *Colored Pencils - to highlight items and help

                 you map and sketch 

                *Felt-tipped Markers - as per colored pencils 


                *Good pencil and eraser - for making/erasing
                 notes and design work 


                *Good ruler - useful for drawing lines or
                 measuring things 


                *Hex and graph paper - organizational tools/big

                 aids in sketch maps or line diagrams 


             C) Game Suppliers: Two well known, mail order
             gaming suppliers (there are many, but here are two

             I have had good luck with over the years) are:


             Zocchi/Gamescience Distributors

             1512 - 30th Avenue

             Gulfport, MS 39501


             Wargames West
             P O Box 9496

             Albuqurque, NM 87119 

             6) Bottom-Up or Campaign World Creation

             A) Overview:


                *The most common method in practice of creating

                 an FRP world 

                 Natural outgrowth of campaigns 
                *

                *"Easiest" method 

                 Potentially inconsistent 
                *

                *The "Pre-Fab" campaign (e.g. Ravenloft, Dark

                 Sun, EarthDawn, etc.) is a sub-set of this 


             B) Description:

             This method develops the world on a "need to know"

             basis for the characters. typically the referee

             does not develop the details for the world until
             the characters have gotten to the point in the

             campaign where the information is relevant.


             One can view this as the "concentric circle" method

             of world creation. The circles represent the parts

             of the world which must be developed to accommodate
             the characters demands on the world. The longer and

             deeper the campaign goes, the more there is a

             requirement for information. The characters have a
             certain "sphere of influence". The parts of the

             world touched by that sphere must be developed. 

             C) Advantages of the Bottom-up Method:


              1. The development of the campaign is natural. The

                 FRP World grows and matures as the campaign
                 grows and matures. The referee is able to

                 directly see which areas of the world need more

                 development based on the actions of the
                 characters. 


              2. The players are an intimate part of the world

                 creation process. The actions of the PCs affect
                 the part of the world "seen" by the characters;

                 so, the players help define the world by

                 determining what needs more detail and what
                 does not. For example, if the players are very

                 concerned about clothing styles in the world,

                 the referee is likely to spend more time in
                 that area, but the referee might be able to get

                 by with a minimal description or examination of

                 artistic styles. 

              3. The referee does not devote "wasted" time in

                 world development. Because the world is shaped
                 based on the characters' sphere of influence,

                 the referee knows that most of the details he

                 creates will be useful to the players. 


             D) Disadvantages:

              1. The referee has less control in the world

                 design than in Top-Down world creation. 


              2. There is a large potential for inconsistency in
                 the world creation. This is especially true

                 when the referee is mixing and matching

                 "modules" into his campaign. Since many of the
                 details in the world are being created more or

                 less ad hoc, some of the details may be

                 inconsistent with each other. 

              3. The referee takes a big risk of being caught

                 "off-guard" if the players ask questions about
                 details the referee did not anticipate or if

                 the characters travel to some area of the world
                 which has not been examined in advance by the
                 referee. 


              4. The relations between portions or the world can

                 be artificial. For example, if the referee
                 decides to use both portions of Krynn and

                 Arkham in his campaign, the connections between

                 the two areas may be contrived at best. 


             E) How to Design a Bottom-Up World:

              1. Define the "Key Areas" which will be affected

                 by the Campaign 


                  1. Identify the geographical regions where the
                     party will be operating in. 


                  2. Identify the key groups (e.g. national,
                     social, trade, religious, racial, species,

                     linguistic ) which will influence the

                     Campaign. 

              2. Develop the relations between these key areas. 


                  1. Go one level of detail past what you
                     believe the campaign will need. 


                  2. Be as "open ended" as possible with

                     motivations for individuals. "Those wacky
                     players do the most unexpected things!" 


                  3. Be as consistent with tie-ins as possible.
                     Try to derive some motivation for

                     connecting plot lines and regions. Answer

                     the question, "why are these things
                     related?" before you spring it on the

                     player characters. 


                  4. Define the motivations behind various
                     groups important to the campaign (e.g.

                     racial, theological, economic, etc.) 

              3. Place maguffins in the campaign to draw the

                 characters into the background of the region.

                 In this way, you can direct the campaign
                 development to some extent. 


              4. Be willing to ad lib, but write down your
                 ad-libs as soon as possible after the game

                 session. Ok, so you decided the Grey Wizards
                 ear was green! Fine, but the next time the

                 characters run into the Grey Wizard again, they

                 will expect his ear to be green. If it is not,
                 you better have a good explanation ready to go.


              5. Keep a good campaign diary. Use the notes to
                 redefine the key areas based on the players

                 actions in the session, and then start over

                 again with step (1) above. 


             F) Helpful Hints in Designing a Bottom-Up World:

              1. As you organize for an adventure, be willing to

                 discard material that does not fit what already

                 exits in your campaign world. Never say "I did
                 it, because it was in the module."

              2. Likewise, be willing to add material to tie

                 together the current adventure with adventures

                 that came before or that you are planning to
                 run in the future. For example, if there is a

                 religious faction that is the lynch-pin to a

                 module you would like to run in your campaign
                 in the future then you will want to drop hints

                 that such an organization exists in earlier

                 sessions. That way, it does not seem so
                 incongruous when you introduce the sect later

                 and does not beg the question "Hey, if these

                 guys are so influential how come we never heard
                 of them before?" 


              3. Write down plenty of notes and lots of maps.
                 Make several potential plotlines up. Let these

                 sit for a couple of days. Re-evaluate them. Ask

                 yourself the following questions: 

                  1. Are they reasonable? 


                  2. Will the party find them plausible? (Not
                     the same as (1) above.) 


                  3. Are they consistent with the campaign to

                     this point? 

                  4. Are they complete enough to cover the major

                     expected courses of action the campaign is
                     expected to take? 


                  5. Are there sufficient "safety nets" to draw

                     the party back to the central campaign
                     themes if the group strays in unexpected

                     ways? Parties always do unexpected things.

                     If you have a particular theme you want
                     preserved in the campaign, or if there are

                     things which must occur from a plot

                     continuity standpoint then you should have
                     back up plans of how to get the party

                     involved if they do something quite the

                     opposite of what you expect. 

              4. Be willing to accept suggestions from the party

                 to help you develop the world. In practice, it
                 is useful to spend five minutes after each

                 session asking the players about what they want

                 to see more of and anything they have questions
                 about from the session. I have also found it is

                 very useful to give the players some handouts

                 each session like maps, old documents,
                 diagrams, etc. It helps them picture the

                 campaign world more easily. 


              5. Try to create interesting characters and
                 plotlines. Be careful never to fall in love

                 with a particular NPC or place in the campaign,

                 because the PC's are sure to find some way to
                 destroy that NPC or place through pure chance

                 without malice or forethought! 

              6. The purpose of gaming is to have fun; if

                 creating the world is so time consuming and

                 difficult that it is no longer fun then you
                 should do something else (e.g. let someone else

                 referee for awhile, etc.) 


             7) Top-Down or Deliberate World Creation

             A) Overview:


                *It's time consuming! 

                 It is difficult! 
                *

                *It is incredibly rewarding! 

                 It creates a very consistent world. 
                *

                *This is generally not for a first-time
                 referee!!!

             B) Description:


             This method develops the world beginning with the

             fundamental cosmology and works down to the size
             and description of the sandgrains the hobbit,

             peasant girl has between her toes.


             One can view this as the Calculus textbook approach

             to FRP world creation. Every portion that is added

             is logically self consistent and at the same time
             flows from earlier portions developed. 


             C) Advantages:

              1. The referee has total control over the

                 development of the world. 


              2. The world is logically consistent. (At least
                 the world is as logically consistent as the

                 referee can imagine.) 

              3. The referee runs little risk of being caught

                 off-guard with respect to details or background

                 in the campaign. 

              4. It is one of the most direct creative processes

                 possible. When you are finished, your world

                 will be a direct reflection of your creative
                 energies. 


             D) Disadvantages:


              1. The players have less input in the creation of

                 the world. 

              2. The process is very time consuming. 


              3. If the campaign is not a long one, the referee
                 runs the risk of spending large amounts of time

                 on detail which the players will never directly

                 experience. 


             E) How to develop a Top-Down World

              1. Select a gaming system that conforms to your

                 fantasy world view. If you are fortunate, you

                 can use an existing system "off the shelf", but
                 it may involve large modifications to existing

                 systems or even development of an entirely new

                 system. Here are a few things to consider: 

                  1. Is the system consistent with your own

                     moral and political "comfort zone"? If it

                     is not then choose another system. There is
                     no shame in this. You are the referee

                     afterall. It would be the height of

                     arrogance for a gaming group to ask you to
                     contribute hundreds of hours in time and

                     energy to a system you feel uncomfortable

                     with. 

                  2. Does the system have the right "feel" for

                     your concept of the fantasy world? 

                  3. Are the mechanics workable? Some systems

                     have great atmosphere, but the mechanics

                     are too great a burden when you actually
                     try to play. 


              2. Determine the scope that your world must cover.
                 Do you need to design a "world" that

                 encompasses an entire solar system or will

                 something the size of metropolitan Boston do? A
                 few helpful questions to help you determine the

                 scope of your world would be: 


                  1. Does your referee style support the grand
                     quest motif? (Larger) 


                  2. Do you like lots of local detail? (Smaller)

                  3. Could you do a whole campaign in a single

                     village? (Smaller) 

                  4. Do you like to see lots of exploration?

                     (Larger) 


                  5. Does the rules system you are using have
                     provisions for long travel? For example,

                     teleportation, tall ships and wagon trains

                     all imply long journeys. (Larger) 

                  6. What is the technology level in the

                     campaign? (Higher=Larger) 

              3. Develop the cosmology. Answer all of the

                 following questions. (Note: the players may

                 never know these things, but you should.) 

                  1. Where did the world come from? 


                  2. What happened to the deities (if any)? 

                  3. Are they still active in the world? 


                  4. Are other planes or worlds accessible? 

                  5. Is magic possible? Psionics? 


                  6. How accessible are these things? 

              4. Develop the physical world. 


                  1. Develop the geography. What fraction of the
                     world is water versus dry land? How many

                     suns, stars, planets and moons are there?

                     Where are the mountain ranges? Are there
                     any areas of geological instability? Why? 


                  2. Develop the climate. Are there tides in the
                     ocean? Are the tides related to the

                     cosmology? Which areas are frigid? Arid?
                     Wet? 

                  3. Highlight any peculiar (different than

                     Earth) features. 

                  4. Are there any special (e.g. magical) areas?


              5. Determine how you would like to populate the

                 world in gross terms. What races would you like
                 to include? What general types of societies

                 would you like to have? Are these compatible

                 with the results you obtained in steps 3 and 4
                 above? If not, can you modify the results to

                 accommodate the cultures and races? (Possibly

                 by including some special areas?) Otherwise, go
                 back to step three and re-work the world until

                 the results are consistent through step 5. 

              6. Develop an eco-structure. 


                  1. Determine the food chain. 

                  2. Where are the fertile areas? Waste areas? 


                  3. Place the vegetation or lifeforms at the

                     base of the food chain. 

                  4. Are there areas with exotic or unique

                     eco-structures? Try to tie these areas of
                     the world in with the remainder of the

                     world. 


                  5. Place animals or other creatures towards
                     the top of the food chain. Place the lowest

                     members of the food chain first (e.g.

                     herbivores on Earth) then work to the
                     higher order creatures. 


              7. Develop the cultures. 

                  1. Place the culture in the world at an

                     appropriate location. Explore the

                     interaction between the culture and the
                     geographical/eco-structure the population

                     finds itself in. 

                  2. What race will populate this culture? 


                  3. Look at the following items: 

                      1. Resources

                         (physical/lifeforms/spiritual/magical) 


                      2. Subsistence patterns 

                      3. Religion 


                      4. Technology level 

                      5. Social structure 


                      6. Symbolism (architecture/art/mysticism) 

                      7. Languages (per race/per culture/per

                         region) 

                      8. Trade, currency 


              8. Tie the cultures together. 

                  1. Is there competition for resources? 


                  2. What kind of trade there is between
                     cultures? 


                  3. How flexible are the cultures? 

                  4. Have past climatic or geological events

                     influenced the culture (e.g. big floods,

                     ice ages, comet impacting on planet, angry
                     gods, etc.)? 


                  5. How quickly do the races reproduce? 

                  6. Are there religious, political, or ethnic

                     conflicts or compatibilities? 


                  7. Write the histories of each of these
                     cultures. 


              9. Make the nations:
                 Nation attributes: 


                  1. Social system 

                  2. Racial groups 


                  3. Major religions 

                  4. Major religious figures 


                  5. Major laws 

                  6. Customs 


                  7. Holidays 

                  8. Style of clothing 


                  9. General mindset 

                 10. Educational system 


                 11. Economic system 

                 12. Notable products or commodities 


                 13. Major economic leaders 

                 14. Major trading partners 


                 15. Army: quality, tactics, equipment,

                     technology (magic items?) 

                 16. Prevalence of magic 


                 17. Legal status of magic 

                 18. Magical institutions 


                 19. Magical education 

                 20. General attitude towards magic 


             10. Although you may have considered them
                 previously, take particular care to highlight

                 "special" aspects of your world. (In other

                 words, what things make your world truly
                 unique? Why would someone want to play in your

                 world in particular?) 

                  1. Are there unique races or species? 


                  2. Do the races have special symbiotic

                     relationships? 

                  3. Are there periodically repeated geological,

                     cosmological or climatic events? 

                  4. Does your world have unique aspects to the

                     magical or psionic manipulation or use? 

             11. Let your world sit, and do not look at it or

                 think about it for at least two weeks. Then go

                 back and look at it. Is it logical and
                 internally consistent from a cosmological,

                 historical and ecological standpoint? Here is a

                 brief list of some questions to ask: 

                  1. Are there lots of caves filled with large

                     creatures with no food source? Why? How? 

                  2. Are there burning deserts next to glaciers?

                     Why? How? 


                  3. If the good gods/desses are so darn
                     powerful, why are there still evil entities

                     around? 

                  4. Why doesn't the water spill off the edge of

                     the world? 


                  5. How far can you see? Where is the horizon?
                     Why? 


                  6. Is there enough fertile ground to support
                     the population? 


                  7. Why did the high technology races allow the

                     low tech races to survive? Do they compete
                     for resources? (Think about it! Maybe there

                     are religious or cultural issues involved.)

             12. Develop the PCs to take advantage of or

                 highlight unique aspects of your world. 


             13. Introduce maguffins in the campaign to help PCs
                 explore interesting areas and relationships in

                 your world. 

             14. Be willing to ad lib, but as before, write it

                 down so you remember it! 


             F) Helpful hints for designing a Top-Down World


              1. All those NPCs and "schtuff" --- they are all
                 imaginary, really! 


              2. Be willing to modify part of the world later if

                 it proves to be inconsistent. But, carefully
                 consider the effects of doing so before you dig

                 out the eraser! Items in a fantasy world just

                 as in the real world tend to be connected in
                 ways we poor mortals cannot hope to see without

                 very deep thought. Unfortunately, you, a

                 mortal, will not see all of the
                 interconnections right away. But, fear not! If

                 there is an advantageous one for the PCs, they

                 will spot them at the worst possible time! 

              3. Make lots of notes in the creation process.

                 Writing down your thoughts tends to organize
                 and crystallize them. 


              4. The more different your world is from Earth,

                 the more exotic and interesting it will be, but
                 it will also be harder to visualize and

                 referee. 

              5. Start small! Do not go out and develop a

                 Jupiter sized planet as your first project. 


              6. Humans are multi-sensed creatures. Be willing
                 to use visual and audio items to help suspend

                 disbelief and draw the players into your world

                 as well as using good dialog. 

              7. Develop the cosmology and physical world to

                 completion or near completion, but only develop
                 outlines or skeletons for cultures which the

                 gaming group will most likely never encounter.

                 Spend 80 percent of your time developing things
                 that the party is likely to spend 80 percent of

                 its time interacting with! 


             8) How to organize an FRP World


              1. Get a bunch of binders. The easiest way to
                 organize is to break up the world into a bunch

                 of smaller portions. 


              2. Here are several sample organizational schemes:

                  1. By geography... 


                  2. By historical era... 

                  3. By culture... 


                  4. By race... 

                  5. Any combination of the above... 


              3. Index your world early on, or it will become an
                 insurmountable task later on. 


              4. Always include a brief description of what a
                 binder contains at the beginning. Ten years

                 from now, you are unlikely to remember it

                 contains "samples of Overmannish wedding garb
                 from the Huvis-Kanine era". 


             9) Conclusion:


             Stomp and shout and applaud! Give generously! I

             have a family to support! 


                    Please send questions and comments to:
                             staats@alum.mit.edu

                                  Thank you,
                                 In service,
                                 Rich Staats


             Copyright © 1995 Rich Staats

             Site design by Brandon Blackmoor
             Last updated 28 June 1998
