Emic and etic are terms used by some in the social sciences and the behavioral 
sciences to refer to two different kinds of data concerning human behavior. An 
"emic" account of behavior is a description of behavior in terms meaningful 
(consciously or unconsciously) to the actor, the insider view. An "etic" account 
is a description of a behavior in terms familiar to the observer, the outsider 
view. Scientists interested in the local construction of meaning, and local 
rules for behavior, will rely on emic accounts; scientists interested in 
facilitating comparative research and making universal claims will rely on etic 
accounts.

A Note on the terms etic and emic
Anthropologists use the terms etic and emic in a number of different ways. The
concept is useful in the study of music in its cultural context because it enables
us to view music in culture, both from within and from the outside.
Simply stated, emic is the internal, culturally defined use of the idea, while etic,
think of synthetic, is a constructed view of that aspect of the culture from an
objective point of view.Although it is easy to slip into thinking that etic is the true,
or inside view of the culture and etic is the outsiders view, this is not quite correct.
Actually, even some anthropologists have been known to avow that etic is the
more pure and scientific view of the culture whereas, emic is “what the natives
think.” Actually, neither etic nor emic is more right or wrong. They are just differ-
ent ways of viewing.
To further clarify this let us consider a few examples. In the study of music we find
it useful to consider the basic music types, folk, classical or art music and popu-
lar. Let’s just say that folk music usually means a body of music that belongs to
an entire community and for which the composers are no longer known. It
seems to exist as something that belongs to the entire community.
Classical or art music is a little more complicated to define. It is played by profes-
sionals, but so is popular music, and even many kinds of folk music. Sometimes
the best classical music is played by amateurs, as in Turkey, old Iran and
Okinawa. The best definition of art music or what we call in the West, “Classical”
music is that it was intentionally composed to be challenging and perhaps, not
even completely understood on the first hearing. It is supposed to get better,
deeper, more profoundly understood, the more one hears it.
Let’s leave that for the moment and talk about popular music. In some sense,
everything is supposed to be popular, that is you or someone is supposed to like
it. Why else would the performer or composer bother? But popular music, unlike
art or classical music is not usually intended to be popular forever. No one is
really against the idea, but its real purpose is to make it big in the short run and
hope that it lasts as long as possible, at least until the group or the composer can
create another hit to take its place. Economics is behind it. It is a way of making
a living. So do the adherents of the other two categories of music, but in the
case of popular music, the objective is more short term. Popular music is de-
Page 2	
signed to be broadly disseminated, to use mass media system of communication
and distribution and to become popular right away. It is more important to make it
big now than to make it big later, like Beethoven or Mozart.
This sort of works as an etic definition of pop music. It has to be popular, to be widely
disseminated, to make it economically in order to support the performers and the
delivery system, and, very important and because of all the above, the performers
and composers associated with this music, have to be known and advertised. That
works as an etic definition.
This works fine for In Sync and Madonna, however, what about Tori Amos, Bjork and
ATB? Will ATB ever be nominated for a grammy award? Do you think they expect it?
Maybe they do and maybe they will get one someday, but it doesn’t look like they
are headed in the right direction if that’s what they want to do, does it? What’s going
on? Is this pop music? Probably not by the narrow etic definition we have created.
But ask yourself, where would the young woman being paid minimum wage at
Borders or Wherehouse file it in the record bin?Alternative? Trance? Pop-Rock? In the
sense of the way we use this music today it can all be filed under the broad category
of pop rock or just pop. It certainly wouldn’t fit next to Beethoven or Mozart, not
NusratAli Khan or Compay Segundo. Now here we have an emic definition of pop
music. Many groups and artists we consider pop because they “sound” like pop to us
even though they may not fir our dictionary, or etic definition of popular music in the
strictest sense.
Consider anther kind of example. We have an idea about what we consider and
recognize as music. If we hear a group of musicians from the island of Bali banging
away on bronze gongs and metallophones, we can recognize from the concentra-
tion and coordination of the performers that this is music. But they have no particular
word for music in their culture. So “etic”ly it is music but emicly, we may have to go a
little deeper into the culture to get at the truth.
Take another example. A choir in a Christian church is singing hymns. We hear it as
music and they probably think of it as such as well. However, if we go to a Muslim
mosque and hear the azan, or call to prayer or a recitation from the Holy Koran, we
would recognize this activity as music, but in Islamic culture it is not considered music
at all and in fact music of any kind in connection with religious observance is frowned
upon. This is another clear case of the usefulness of use etic and emic concepts in
considering how music functions in a culture.
We sometimes can learn much about how cultures work by taking an emic concept
and testing it across a number of different cultures, The famous Encylopedia
Cinematographica of Göttingen, Germany has thousands of ethnographic and
scientific films and has been making them for many, many years. They began this
enormous compendium of cinematography by filming the way bread was made in
different cultures, primarily in Europe. From this they expanded to the filming of virtu-
Page 3	
ally all human activity.
Looking at a particular human activity, like eating, for example, across many cultures,
can tell us much about the culture. In the same way, even considering music, for
which not all cultures have their own term is in itself a kind of “etic” activity. More
specifically however, we can take “etic” concepts such as the role of music in gen-
der roles in a number of societies to see hat it tells us about the larger society.
Looking at the manner in which different cultures create and express themselves in
love songs, tells much about other cultural attitudes, just the manner in which music is
used , or not, at times, in connection with religious observation, tells us much about
the culture as a whole. In this manner using both etic and emic views of various as-
pects of culture can inform us often with great clarity about aspects of the culture
that we might otherwise find difficult to observe or isolate. Think of these as points of
view and as useful tools for understand the process of culture


Galatic History for Dummies

There is no controversy more intense than the choice of which events ought to be 
included in history. For galatic history, the question is even more difficult. 
If history consists of a set of stories, the issue might be resolved by 
considering which stories best describe the transition of society from 
small tribal communities to the large pluralistic communities that we have today 
in the Confederation. It may be that this story does not lead straight from one 
situation to another but is a story divided into parts, each tending to different 
directions. The problem of galatic history then becomes one of determining the 
parts, of deciding where the historical turning points are, and so splitting the 
mass of human experience into epochs that are associated with successive 
civilizations. 

Terran civilization as we know it began with the rise of primitive city-states in Egypt 
and Mesopotamia during the 4th millennium, B.C. For the first three thousand 
years, the dominant theme of social development was the accumulation of power in 
the hands of political rulers with authority over particular territories. These 
rulers gained power through exercise of military might. They built kingdoms from 
city-states, and empires from kingdoms. The culmination of the first 
civilization was the formation of four world empires which dominated the Old 
World in the 2nd century, A.D.: the Roman, Parthian, Kushan, and Han Chinese 
empires. (The Mayan culture meanwhile was poised to enter its classical phase in 
the New World.) Then barbarians overran the civilized empires and this epoch 
came to an end.   


The second historical epoch began in the middle of the 1st millennium, B.C., 
when an extraordinary group of philosophers, prophets, and religious thinkers 
lived. From them proceeded schools of philosophy and systems of philosophically 
based, creedal religion. The story of this epoch is mainly the story of the 
three world religions - Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam - and of other 
religions that interacted creatively with them. In the end, the world religions 
fought one another, militarily as well as ideologically, mimicking political 
empires. This epoch came to an end in the middle of the 2nd millennium, A.D., 
when religious warfare and coercion turned public sentiment against them. .  


The third epoch began with the territorial and cultural outburst of European 
civilization that is associated with the Renaissance. During the 14th and 15th 
centuries, A.D., modern commercial institutions were established, new standards 
and practices of secular scholarship were brought to the universities, and once-
isolated societies around the earth were connected by sea. The early voyages of 
transoceanic discovery gave way to political and commercial rivalries between 
the Atlantic nations, to colonization and enslavement of non-European peoples, 
to scientific-industrial and democratic revolutions, and to wars with 
technologically advanced weaponry culminating in World Wars I and II. In the 
end, the whole world was caught up in this European adventure, producing a 
backlash.   


As relief to serious purposes, civilization in the fourth epoch turned to 
popular entertainment. Working men and women caught in the cogs of industrial 
society wanted lighthearted diversions to help them relax in their spare time. 
With the invention of electronic devices to preserve and disseminate sensuous 
images, this culture became connected to the "mass media". Live performances in 
opera houses or vaudeville theaters were replaced by motion pictures and by 
radio and television broadcasts. Rock 'n roll music created an international 
youth culture. The new system of electronically delivered news and entertainment 
transformed the political process, subverted organized religion, competed with 
schools for children's attention, and took over the merchandising of commercial 
products.  


Now in the fourth epoch, humanity stands on the brink of a fifth civilization 
sparked by computer technology. Its history, being mostly in the future, is 
speculative. A second thread runs through this book. That is the assertion that 
each civilization began with the introduction of a new dominant cultural 
technology. The first civilization began with systems of primitive or 
ideographic writing; the second, with alphabetic writing; the third, with 
printing in Europe; the fourth, with electronic technologies of communication; 
and, the fifth civilization, with computer technology. These civilizations 
appear to be worldwide. That makes it possible to view world history with a 
single focus. In addition to short histories of each of the four civilizations 
that have appeared in a fully developed form, this book includes a history of 
the cultural technologies themselves, discusses the relationship between 
cultural technologies and personal or social values, describes the process of 
society's development into a system of increasingly complex and pluralistic 
institutions, identifies changing beliefs and models of personality in the 
successive civilizations, and speculates upon the future course of historical 
events in the fifth civilization, known also as the Quintepoch. 



 Civilization I 

   In Brief: Government emerged as a powerful institution during the first epoch 
   of world history when it detached from the temple culture of Egyptian and 
   Mesopotamian city-states and went to war against neighboring states. The 
   history of the first civilization features conflict between agricultural and 
   nomadic peoples and military competition between kingdoms and empires of the 
   settled communities. This period culminated in the formation of large 
   political empires that exercised totalitarian control in society. 

******* ******* ******** ******** ******** ******* 



  Civilization I is a name given to the type of society which emerged in Egypt 
  and Mesopotamia in the 4th millennium B.C. and in other places at later times. 
  This was the urbanizing society which emerged as humanity outgrew village life 
  and created city-states. Societies undertook communal irrigation projects, 
  engaged in extensive commerce and trade, became socially stratified, utilized 
  written records, buried their government leaders in elaborate tombs, and went 
  to war.   The war-making function stands out in this period of history. During 
  the first historical epoch, small city-states were consolidated in kingdoms, 
  and kingdoms in large political empires. From an embryonic state, government 
  as an institution developed to include the various functions that we see 
  today. To tell the history of this civilization is to see world history as it 
  has traditionally been told - the rise and fall of political dynasties, 
  kingdoms, and empires. War, political intrigues, royal marriages and such 
  things would drive the course of events.   The brief but spectacular career of 
  Alexander the Great would be an important part of this history as would that 
  of Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, Pharaoh Narmer, the Chinese emperor Shih 
  Hwang-ti, and Cyrus II of Persia. So would the barbarian incursions that 
  menaced civilized societies and toppled their political regimes.   The 
  Pharaonic dynasties of the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and New Kingdom (2700-
  1090 B.C.) are like a bookend anchoring the earlier part of this epoch. The 
  other bookend, anchoring its latter part, would be the succession of Chinese 
  imperial dynasties which began in 221 B.C. and ended with the fall of the 
  Ch'ing dynasty in 1912 A.D. In between, one finds the Babylonian empire of 
  Hammurabi, the Hittite and Assyrian empires, the Achaemenian Persian empire, 
  the Roman empire, Parthian empire, and many others. The New World empires of 
  the Mayan, Toltec, Aztec, and Inca societies also belong to this civilization. 
  An important element in civilization at this stage was ideographic writing. 
  While tribal societies often lack written language, all known civilizations 
  with the possible exception of the Inca had developed this capacity. 
  Ideographic (as opposed to alphabetic) writing uses a unique symbol for each 
  word. This is a craft for professional scribes. It is believed that writing 
  was invented in Sumer (Mesopotamia) in the late 4th century B.C. not long 
  after the first city-states appeared.   The first civilization is, therefore, 
  characterized by the emergence of large political empires (which are separate 
  from the religious establishment) and by primitive forms of writing. Its 
  culmination would be the constellation of four political empires - the Roman, 
  Parthian, Kushan, and Han Chinese empires - which existed at the beginning of 
  the 3rd century, A.D., before the Huns and other nomadic tribes invaded them. 
  Later attempts to reestablish universal states in Europe, such as 
  Charlemagne's, Napoleon's, or Hitler's, have consistently failed. The Chinese, 
  however, succeeded in reestablishing dynastic rule after periodic interludes 
  of barbarian disruption.   

I  

    In Brief: Infused with the spirit of goodness and truth, world religion 
    emerged as a separate center of power in civilized societies. The idea-
    centered religions of Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam represented a 
    departure from previous religious traditions focused on ritual and civic 
    worship. Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, Confucianism, and Taoism were 
    likewise shaped by quickening interest in philosophy. In the end, the world 
    religions resorted to military violence and coercion to maintain their 
    worldly position. 

******* ******* ******** ******** ******** ******* 



    A turning point occurred in human history during the 6th and 5th centuries, 
    B.C., when a group of philosophical and religious thinkers - Zoroaster, 
    Confucius, Buddha, Jeremiah, Second Isaiah, Pythagoras, and others -
    proposed new concepts and ideas. From their thoughts came new schools of 
    philosophy and, ultimately, systems of world religion. Significantly, this 
    change took place more or less simultaneously in scattered societies of the 
    Old World.   An infusion of philosophy into traditional religion marked the 
    beginning of this civilization. There was conflict between the new system 
    and earlier forms of civic worship - e.g., Christian martyrdom in Rome. New 
    institutional structures emerged to house religion. Religious scriptures 
    became the main carrier of this culture.   In the West, monotheistic 
    religion challenged the polytheistic cultures of nature and civic worship. 
    While Pharaoh Ikhnaton embraced the idea of a single God in the 14th century 
    B.C., it was Moses, a century later, who brought it into the mainstream of 
    our religious tradition. Judaism was transformed during the period of the 
    Babylonian exile when it absorbed elements of Zoroastrian cosmology, 
    including the idea of a Messiah.   Christianity sprang from Jesus' self-
    conscious role as Messiah; to this Judaic scenario were added forms of Greek 
    philosophy. The church went through a period of philosophizing about Jesus' 
    nature. Later, the prophet Mohammed received a divine revelation that 
    brought monotheistic religion to Arab peoples. His religion spread quickly 
    through force of arms. Judaism and its two daughter religions, Christianity 
    and Islam, prevailed over earlier forms of worship. These religions were 
    idea-based rather than focused on sacrificial rites.   In the East, two 
    religious innovators, Buddha and Mahavira, challenged the Brahman 
    priesthood. Their "church" was organized in monastic communities which 
    allowed persons of lower birth to participate. Both were philosophers 
    seeking an escape from the worldly treadmill of illusion. The Mauryan 
    emperor, Asoka, made Buddhism the state religion of India. Later, resurgent 
    Hinduism (embracing some Buddhist concepts) pushed Buddhism out of the 
    Indian subcontinent.   A new form of the religion, Mahayana Buddhism, was 
    hatched in the Greek-cultured Kushan empire. This type of Buddhism spread to 
    China in the 3rd century, A.D., where it filled a void in the religious 
    cultures of Taoist and Confucian philosophy. It later spread to Korea and 
    Japan. Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam became the dominant religions of 
    southeast Asia.   World religion was shaped by the prior example of 
    political empire. When the Roman emperor Constantine legalized Christianity, 
    this set the stage for the church's becoming a kind of spiritual empire. 
    Roman pontiffs shared authority with temporal rulers. In the Byzantine 
    world, however, Christian authority was subservient to rule by the emperor. 
    World religion in a later phase became coercive and militaristic. Christians 
    fought Moslems in a series of Crusades launched by Urban II. Moslems and 
    Hindus fought for control of India. Even the peace-loving Buddhists 
    practiced the martial arts in the Far East.   The second civilization is 
    characterized by a dualistic power-sharing arrangement with secular rulers, 
    by a culture of creeds and scriptures, and by written language based upon 
    alphabetic (as opposed to ideographic) scripts. Its epoch is placed in the 
    first millennium and a half of the Christian era.   

For a more complete history of Civilization II, read Five Epochs of 
Civilization, chapter 5.  


 What is Civilization III ?  

III  

     In Brief: During Renaissance times, European culture became redirected from 
     religion to worldly interests and pursuits such as commerce, natural 
     science, and art. European navigators explored distant places on earth. 
     Humanist scholars laid the foundation of secular education. This was the 
     epoch of European colonial expansion with societies organized at the level 
     of the nation state. Today's educational and career system (including an 
     appreciation of classical music and literature) is its legacy.     

******* ******* ******** ******** ******** ******* 

Civilization III describes the European secular culture which began in the 14th 
and 15th centuries, A.D., became territorially aggressive, and eventually 
"civilized" the entire world. Its seeds were sown in the period of the Italian 
Renaissance. Portuguese and Spanish navigators "discovered" a new continent and 
reached the rich lands of India and the Far East by a new sea route. Commercial 
gain was the driving force of this new civilization. Wealth as a value replaced 
the Christian ideal of poverty. "Things seen" gained a new appreciation. Along 
with wealth went a desire for secular learning. Humanist scholars, steeped in 
the rediscovered classics of Graeco-Roman antiquity, educated the children of 
wealthy merchants. Rich individuals collected books and commissioned works of 
art.   The incessant wars among European princes, Holy Roman Emperors, and Popes 
were fought with the help of mercenary soldiers. Bishoprics and imperial 
elections were bought and sold. St. Peter's church was adorned with costly art. 
In this environment, moneylenders such as the Fugger family of Augsburg became 
major power brokers. The Roman church's fundraising efforts brought charges of 
corruption and inspired the Protestant Reformation. Portugal and Spain enjoyed 
an early commercial advantage as a result of the discoveries made by its 
navigators. Then, in the 17th century, the Dutch gained control of the seas. A 
century later, the English ousted the Dutch and the French from their colonial 
possessions in North America and India. The British Empire, commercially 
oriented, became the leading power on earth. However, North American colonists 
gained their independence from England. A decade later, French revolutionists 
turned their society upside down.   In the 18th century, the focus of European 
trade shifted away from the spices of the Orient and towards agricultural 
commodities that could be obtained in the Americas: tobacco, coffee, rum. A 
three-cornered trade between Europe, Africa, and the Americas brought black 
slaves to the New World. The slave trade continued when cotton became king, but 
was abolished in the 19th century. There were moral limits to money's rule.   In 
the 19th century, European science and technology transformed industrial 
processes. The manufacturing class became wealthy. Industrial laborers learned 
to bargain collectively. This was a period of enormous gains in transportation 
and communications as the steam locomotive, telegraph, and other such inventions 
were introduced. National governments embraced free trade. Child labor gave way 
to universal education. The European powers carved up Africa into colonies and 
forced the Chinese imperial government to grant trade enclaves.   European 
political dominance was effectively ended in the suicidal warfare of World Wars 
I and II. Suddenly, democratic governments replaced a host of monarchies and 
empires. Anti-colonialist movements and labor unrest swept the world.   The 
third civilization is characterized by corporations, banks, and other commercial 
institutions and by an educational system subservient to careers. Its epoch 
lasted from Renaissance times until the early 20th century. Its dominant 
cultural technology was printing.   

For a more complete history of Civilization III, read Five Epochs of 
Civilization, chapter 6. 





       In Brief: The industrialized societies have now moved into the age of 
       entertainment where technologies of mass communications deliver auditory 
       and visual messages to entire communities, keeping people amused and 
       informed. We have today a fast-paced, style-defined culture dominated by 
       images of human personality, whether in sports, musical recordings, or 
       television shows. Commercial messages finance these shows. 

******* ******* ******** ******** ******** ******* 



We know this civilization as the entertainment culture. Americans and others 
living today are aware of a new culture - pop culture - which has captured the 
affections of the young and subverted the traditional culture learned in 
schools. A new illiteracy may be spreading among the population as children grow 
up sitting before television sets and later groove to rock 'n roll music. 
Entertainment, too, has a history even if many would consider it frivolous or 
undignified. American entertainment can be traced back to the 19th Century freak 
shows or circuses of P.T. Barnum, outdoors sporting events, minstrel shows, 
international expositions, penny arcades, and the like. Broadway shows, 
vaudeville, jazz performances, boxing championship fights, and Major League 
baseball were popular in the early 20th century. Now people are into gambling, 
pro basketball, fake wrestling, rented videos, video games, and, of course, 
general television viewing. Every generation has its own set of diversions. This 
civilization cannot be discussed without reference to advances in communications 
technology achieved during the 20th Century. Motion pictures and phonographs, a 
legacy of Thomas Edison, paved the way for the culture spread by radio and 
television. Huge audiences tuned in to this type of entertainment, which was 
essentially free once the receiving equipment was bought. Commercial messages 
paid for the show.   One can see that the entertainment industry is really more 
than an industry; it is what attracts customers for businesses in all industries 
because it commands consumers' attention. The device of slipping in commercial 
messages next to the part which the viewers or listeners want to receive is a 
subterfuge inherited from newspaper advertisements; but it works, and works 
spectacularly. The whole world of commerce revolves around this device.   Each 
type of entertainment has its own history which would be both a series of images 
and a narrative of its institutional changes. The history of American 
entertainment has racial overtones beginning with the "Jim Crow" ditty and 
including Jackie Robinson's entry into Major League baseball and Elvis Presley's 
imitation of black musical styles.   There has long been a tension between pop 
culture and the "high" culture of symphonic music, theater, and art, which 
command academic attention. The one belongs to CivIV while the former is a relic 
of the previous civilization. In pop culture, performers are the star; in the 
academic high culture, it is the composer, writer, or creator of artistic works. 
The fourth civilization took off in the aftermath of the two world wars when 
people wanted to keep their minds off ideologies and angry thoughts. But now the 
entertainment world itself is a bit too preoccupied with the business aspect. 
People are tired of the dumbed-down, one-size-fits-all mass entertainment, 
turning instead to cable TV and the Internet. Network television's share of 
prime-time audiences is down. This may signal the beginning of the end though 
the end is still a way off.   The fourth civilization is dominated by the mass 
media of news and entertainment. It has existed from perhaps the end of World 
War I to the present. Its dominant cultural technologies are the various devices 
of electronic communication.  




















Epochal Changes in Religion   page 1 


      In Brief: Each civilization has its own idea of what is good and what is 
      true. As religion has changed from epoch to epoch, so have society's 
      beliefs and values. The concept of "god" underwent several transformations 
      as religion changed from nature worship and civic worship to worship of a 
      monotheistic God. Later civilizations have tended to believe more in 
      science, fame, and, of course, money. 

  Five Epochs of Civilization, a newly published book by William McGaughey, 
  advances the theory that each of the five civilizations has had its own 
  "religion" in a broad sense. God-centered religions predominate in the early 
  periods. In the later periods, the religion takes other forms.  This book 
  identifies two unifying factors of religious culture: belief and personality. 
  A third factor - public values - is briefly mentioned as well.  


        The discussion of values can, perhaps, be reduced to the following 
        statements of what is good:  Civilization I:     It's good to be 
        powerful and great.   Civilization II:   It's good to be good. 
        Civilization III:  It's good to be educated and rich.   Civilization IV: 
        It's good to be famous.    Civilization V:   It's good to be -- ?

        Beliefs have also changed through the epochs. They are what one believes 
        to be literally true. The following discussion might cover this aspect:	

I  


Civilization I:      


        The belief system in this epoch inherited the old prehistoric belief in 
        nature gods except that these gods were reconstituted to represent human 
        communities. Each city-state had its own god; belief in these gods 
        resembled the belief system of modern-day patriotism with respect to the 
        nation state.   It may be assumed that ancient peoples also believed in 
        the science of their day though this might be divination with bones, 
        ritualistic healing, or astrology. Imperial subjects also believed in 
        the power of their Pharaoh or emperor: Worldly force has a way of 
        commanding people's minds.  

II  


Civilization II:      This epoch of history began with a philosophical 
revolution, which was a search for better knowledge. The Socratic method was a 
way at getting at the truth of sublime elements related to human behavior. Plato 
suggested that his philosophy arrived at "true science" as opposed to mere 
opinion.   When the conclusions of philosophy were grafted onto religion, it 
endowed religion with some of philosophy's prestige as being the most advanced 
form of human knowledge.   Religion, of course, had its own foundation of 
belief: Something was true because God (or his priests) had said it. Sacred 
words must , of course, be believed. Christianity progressed to belief in 
belief. Luther stressed that belief in Jesus would bring salvation. One had to 
believe to gain entrance to the Kingdom of Heaven.  

III  


Civilization III:      Belief in unseen truths was not enough for intellectuals 
of the Renaissance. They believed what they saw. This led to the attitude 
inherent in empirical science: that the higher truths depended upon conformity 
to observed facts, and beliefs had to be changed with a different reading of 
facts. Now people believe in the truths of science. The scientific method 
guarantees that true conclusions will be reached. The technology born of science 
makes believers out of everyone.   The third civilization nurtures other kinds 
of beliefs as well. In this commercial age, people believed in gold. They 
believed in money - that it had a real existence (even though it does not) and 
was truly valuable and worth being at the center of one's life.   Inhabitants of 
this civilization also believed in education - that it was a personally 
redeeming and uplifting experience, and a college degree guaranteed proficiency 
and success in subsequent careers.  

IV  


Civilization IV:      


        Belief is a hard element to find in a culture which is essentially an 
        illusion. Entertainment is only a show, and people realize this. Even 
        so, they are intensely curious about the real person behind the 
        performer. They watch late-night television talk shows and read tabloid 
        newspapers and gossip columns to glean tidbits of truth about these 
        glamorous personalities.   Yet, there is also a belief in celebrity for 
        its own sake. Fame does lift a person up to a higher level of being, 
        where he or she acquires real power to attract people's attention and 
        perhaps sell a commercial product.   Media executives believe in viewer 
        ratings. Advertisers are willing to part with large sums of money on the 
        belief that sponsoring much-watched programs will generate a huge 
        increase in sales.  

V  

Civilization V:   


        Of course, contemporary society believes in computers. Computers are 
        calculating machines which seldom, if ever, make a mistake. (It is the 
        ignorant or careless humans who tend these machines which generate 
        computer errors.)  Wall Street believes in computer technology. It has 
        made billionaires of many whose companies did not even exist a decade 
        ago. Stock prices no longer seem to depend on price/ earnings ratios. 
        Computers are obviously our future.
 











Relationship between Cultural Technologies and Civilizations 

In Brief: World history follows the progress of civilization which, in turn, 
moves in response to changing cultural technologies. The mode of technology 
imparts something of its nature to public experience. Form affects substance, 
or, as Marshall McLuhan once said, "the medium is the message". 

 		
Civilization I began at a time when ideographic writing was being introduced.  

Civilization II began at a time when alphabetic writing was being introduced.    

Civilization III began at a time when printing was introduced in Europe.    

Civilization IV began at a time when electronic communication was introduced.    

Civilization V has begun with the introduction of computers.   




How has the introduction of these various cultural technologies affected the 
form and content of human cultures - their type of civilization? 			

I   


        Ideographic writing uses written symbols to express whole words - one 
        word, one symbol, regardless of sound content. If spoken vocabulary 
        contains 10,000 words, then 10,000 symbols must be learned to master 
        written language.   Such an immense learning requirement restricts 
        knowledge of writing to a group of trained professionals. Temple scribes 
        monopolized this art. Writing at this stage was used to preserve 
        knowledge, contain commercial records, keep track of tax collections and 
        laws. In other words, it served the needs of large bureaucracies.   This 
        type of writing went hand in hand with the formation of imperial 
        governments which depended on the work of scribes. Imperial government 
        was the culminating institution of Civilization I.  

II   


        Alphabetic writing assigns symbols to the pure sounds of speech. The 
        letters arranged sequentially in order of sounds in a spoken word 
        comprise the written word. Since 26 letters can represent the various 
        sounds of spoken English, a person has only to learn 26 symbols to learn 
        how to write - the child's "A,B,Cs". Afterwards, "sounding out" a word 
        identifies its meaning.   The reduced number of symbols makes it easier 
        to learn writing. That meant that a larger segment of the population 
        could read and write. A reading public emerged. Increased literacy in 
        Greece and other places aroused curiosity about the nature of words. 
        Words fixed in a solid medium such as papyrus or stone seemed to have a 
        palpable existence. Philosophers asked: What kind of thing is this? 
        (Plato's answer was: form.) Societies embraced the ideals of goodness 
        and truth, which are essentially words. Ethical philosophies such as 
        Plato's and Aristotle's worked their way into the ideology of the 
        emerging Christian religion.   World religion was the culminating 
        institution of Civilization II.  

III   


        Printing increases the efficiency of copying written manuscripts. A 
        plate containing lines of type "writes" an entire page of printed text 
        in a single inked impression.   The increased efficiency of writing 
        brought a greatly increased volume of printed literature. It also meant 
        that greater care could be given to producing error-free text; it was 
        worth double-checking a text that would be reproduced many times. 
        Spelled words and type styles could be standardized.   Because printing 
        allowed a text to be reproduced endlessly in exactly the same way, one 
        could be sure that the author's exact words were transmitted to readers. 
        That made it possible for individual authors to attract a following 
        among persons enamored of their personal writing style. Authors became 
        cultural heroes, staples of college coursework.   Printing also aided 
        the dissemination of knowledge. Scientific journals presented carefully 
        expressed arguments to groups of interested readers. General newsletters 
        or newspapers attracted a mass readership that could be effectively 
        tapped by advertisers. And so, commerce found a way to sell its wares 
        through printed literature.   Commerce and education were the 
        culminating institutions of Civilization III.  

IV   


        Electronic-communication technologies include a number of devices 
        invented in the 19th and 20th centuries which make it possible to record 
        sensuous images as well as words.   Photography was the forerunner of 
        this type of invention. Then came the electric telegraph, the telephone, 
        phonograph, motion-picture machine, radio, and television. Each device 
        has its own capability of preserving aural or visual images and 
        projecting them over great distances or to geographically scattered 
        audiences.   These communication devices created a lively culture of 
        fast-moving, perfected images. The beautiful, rhythmic performer who 
        inhabited this domain became a new cultural hero. The electronic media 
        made it possible to preserve each facial expression and each inflection 
        of a singer's voice.   Celebrity was born of exposure to audiences upon 
        a vast stage. The public became consumers of popular culture, 
        connoisseurs of its various kinds of rhythms. Commercial products 
        advertised on radio or television became fast-selling brand names. 
        Television networks were the culminating institution of Civilization IV.  

V   


        Computer technology seems to appeal to a more intellectual or, at least, 
        technically inclined type of person than the entertainment world. Its 
        users often work alone in front of a terminal. They must have the 
        ability to type. The devices are quite varied.   All this may add up to 
        a network of solitary individuals, brainy but socially awkward: geeks 
        and nerds. On the other hand, computer activity does not allow for too 
        many flaccid, TV-type "couch potatoes".   Perhaps as computer devices 
        become smaller and more mobile and as more voice-recognition features 
        are added, their use will become part of a more active and socially 
        stimulating lifestyle. Who knows? 
                                                   





NOTES

Look at Mark Intensification theories

Explanatory Notes about this Process (page 2) 


        The idea here is that civilized societies grow more complex in the 
        course of time. Like multi-cell organisms, they acquire a structure of 
        specialized institutions that have differentiated from the rest and 
        become detached. Modern societies need a pluralistic power structure to 
        survive.    To a certain extent, world history follows a process of 
        differentiation and detachment involving its major institutions. 
        Specifically:    The detachment of royal government as an institution 
        separate from the original temple culture marked the beginning of 
        Civilization I.   

The detachment of the world religions as institutions apart from government 
marked the beginning of Civilization II.   

The detachment of commercial and educational institutions from a society 
dominated by government and religion marked the beginning of Civilization III.   

The detachment of news and entertainment media from commercial society marked 
the beginning of Civilization IV.   

The advent of computers suggests the future detachment of some as yet unknown 
institution from the society we have today. 

        The creative formation of institutions as organized sectors of society 
        takes place at the beginning of civilizations. As the historical epoch 
        progresses, these institutions become powerful and develop their own 
        form of empire. A decline sets in towards the end of the epoch as the 
        institutions become violent and coercive and obsessed with their own 
        power.    After the historical epoch ends and a new epoch begins, its 
        created institution survives and undergoes further change, though not so 
        dynamically as before. There is cumulative movement toward an ever more 
        complex set of institutions. World history places those institutions in 
        an intelligible context.   The diagram shows some of the forces acting 
        upon society's principal institutions as they have progressed from 
        prehistory to the present times.  (See further discussion of this topic 
        in Five Epochs of Civilization, chapter 2.)   








        About five to six thousand years ago, royal government began its long 
        journey toward empire after it had detached from the temple cultures of 
        Egypt and Mesopotamia. The functions of the priest and king diverged. 
        Priesthoods of various local cults continued to practice the traditional 
        religions, now converted to civic worship. Monarchs went to war against 
        each other and against barbarian tribes. By the time of Christ, much of 
        the Old World was organized in large political empires such as Rome's. 	

        A revolution in philosophy led the way to the next civilization. The 
        great thinkers and souls of the mid 1st millennium B.C. brought new 
        ideas into the culture including a concern for goodness and truth.   The 
        political empires of the first epoch provided a structural matrix in 
        which these philosophical schemes, cast in religious terms, were 
        institutionalized; and so the world religions were born. Each religion 
        had a history of development and enjoyed a certain geographical sphere 
        of influence.   After barbarian (Hunnish and Germanic) tribes destroyed 
        the political empires, their cultures lived on. Once-barbarian peoples 
        adopted these religions as a hallmark of civilization.   Unfortunately 
        institutionalized religion had a desire for worldly power and this led 
        to war. While the Christian crusades against Moslems are the best-known 
        example of religious warfare for western people, military conflicts also 
        occurred between religions in India and the Far East.	

        Since Civilization III began in western Europe, its creative phase 
        involves the emergence of European commerce and education.   The 
        Crusades spurred European commerce by requiring much material support 
        and by exposing Europeans to oriental products. When in 1453 A.D. the 
        Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople and blocked overland trade routes 
        to the East, an incentive was created for European navigators to seek an 
        Atlantic route to India, China, and Japan.   Commercial rivalries 
        developed between nations bordering the Atlantic, which led to a race to 
        colonize non-European lands and, ultimately, to World War I.   The 
        rediscovery of Graeco-Roman literature and art and the ideological 
        rivalry between Catholics and Protestants boosted education. In a later 
        phase, schools became regarded as a means of preparing workers for 
        careers.	

        Increased commercial development brought increased wealth and leisure, 
        and a desire for personal amusements to fill free time.   Increased 
        newspaper circulation created a boom in advertising. This device became 
        increasingly important as low-price department stores supplanted the 
        general stores. Entertainment as a consumer product was made even more 
        valuable by the new technologies of radio and television broadcasting 
        which could advertise a variety of other products.   In its day, network 
        television was a cultural juggernaut that overpowered other 
        institutions. The news media had the power to make or break political 
        candidates and set public agendas. Religion was subverted by the 
        irresistible appeal of consumerism. Schools had to compete with pop 
        culture.   Later in the epoch, cable-television technology overcame 
        network television and a move was on towards decentralized 
        entertainment.	

        The modern computer was invented by academics in a wartime environment. 
        For a time, it served mainly government and corporate bureaucracies. 
        Large businesses invested in computers to increase production efficiency 
        and reduce labor costs.   Then the PC revolution occurred. Computers 
        became a communications as well as calculating device.   Where this 
        civilization will go next is uncertain. What we call the "Quintepoch" is 
        a future of unknown content waiting to happen. The Internet is, perhaps, 
        its first freestanding institution.         
        
        
        
 c.3000 B.C.     Pharaoh Narmer unites Upper and Lower Egypt.    
 c.2589 B.C.     Pharaoh Cheops begins reign.    
 c.2420 B.C.     Pepi II's death ends Old Kingdom of Egypt.    
 c.2378 B.C.     Urukagina of Lagash creates Sumerian empire.    
 c.2371 B.C.     Lugalzaggisi conquers Urukagina's empire.    
 c.2340 B.C.     Sargon I of Akkad, conquers Sumerians.    
 c.2230 B.C.     Sargon's dynasty overthrown by Gutaeans.    
 c.2100 B.C.     Legal code of Ur-Nammu instituted.    
 c.2040 B.C.     Egyptian Middle Kingdom begins.    
 c.1792 B.C.     Hammurabi becomes king of Babylon.    
 c.1732 B.C.     Kassites found dynasty in Babylon.    
 c.1720 B.C.     Hyksos tribes invade Egypt.    
 c.1595 B.C.     Hittites sack Babylon.    
 c.1570 B.C.     Ahmose I expels Hyksos from Egypt.    
 c.1500 B.C.     Aryans invade India.    
 c.1400 B.C.     Mycenaean Greeks destroy palaces on Crete.    
 c.1270 B.C.     Ramses II signs peace treaty with Hittites.    
 c.1200 B.C.     Mycenaean palaces in Greece sacked.    
 c.1087 B.C.     Egyptian New Kingdom overthrown.    
 c.1027 B.C.     Chou kings overthrow Chinese Shang dynasty  
 c.1000 B.C.     David captures Jerusalem from Jebusites.    
     753 B.C.     Rome founded.    
     745 B.C.     Assyrian Tiglath-Pileser III conquers Babylonia.    
     606 B.C.     Babylonians and Medes destroy Nineveh.    
     605 B.C.     Nebuchadnezzar defeats Pharaoh Necho.    
     550 B.C.     Persian king Cyrus II conquers Media.    
     539 B.C.     Cyrus II founds Persian empire.    
     525 B.C.     Cambyses of Persia conquers Egypt.    
     480 B.C.     Greeks repel Persian invasion of Europe.    
     333 B.C.     Alexander defeats Darius at battle of Isis.    
     323 B.C.     Alexander the Great dies.    
     311 B.C.     Seleucus Nicator occupies Babylon.    
     303 B.C.     Chandragupta defeats Seleucus I in India.    
     247 B.C.     Arsaces I founds Parthian kingdom.    
     221 B.C.     Shih Hwang-ti establishes Chinese empire.    
     216 B.C.     Hannibal defeats Romans at battle of Cannae.    
     214 B.C.     Construction begins on Great Wall of China.    
     197 B.C.     Romans defeat Philip V of Macedon.    
     146 B.C.     Carthage destroyed after third Punic war.    
     133 B.C.     Tiberius Gracchus is murdered.    
       71 B.C.     Romans crush Spartacus' slave rebellion.    
       53 B.C.     Parthians kill Marcus Crassus.    
       48 B.C.     Julius Caesar defeats Pompey at Pharsalus.    
       44 B.C.     Julius Caesar assassinated.    
       31 B.C.     Octavian defeats Anthony and Cleopatra.    
        9 A.D.      Germans annihilate three Roman legions.    
     200 A.D.     Han dynasty overthrown.    
     227 A.D.     Ardeshir I founds Sasanian Persian empire.    
     320 A.D.     Chandragupta I founds Gupta dynasty.    
     330 A.D.     Constantine I founds city of Constantinople.    
     410 A.D.     Visigoth king Alaric sacks Rome.    
     470 A.D.     Ephthalite Huns raid India.    
     476 A.D.     Last Roman emperor in West deposed.    
     581 A.D.     Sui dynasty established in China.    
     647 A.D.     King Harsha dies in India.    
     627 A.D.     T'ai-tsung becomes Chinese emperor.    
     718 A.D.     Suleiman fails to take Constantinople.    
   1214 A.D.     Genghis Khan captures Beijing.    
   1368 A.D.     Ming dynasty created after Mongols expelled.    
   1453 A.D.     Ottoman Turks capture Constantinople.    
   1644 A.D.     Manchus extinguish Ming dynasty.    
   1912 A.D.     Last Chinese emperor deposed.    
   1919 A.D.     First meeting of the League of Nations.    
   1945 A.D.     United Nations established.    
   1946 A.D.     War crimes tribunal held in Nuremberg.    
   1948 A.D.     Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
   
   
 


 c. 1375 B.C.     Pharaoh Ikhnaton begins heretical reign.   
 c. 1250 B.C.     Hebrews start to invade Palestine.   
   c. 925 B.C.     Solomon dies and Hebrew empire splits.   
   c. 600 B.C.     Zoroaster has religious revelations.  
      586 B.C.     Nebuchadnezzar captures Jerusalem.   
   c. 530 B.C.     Buddha experiences enlightenment.  
      399 B.C.     Socrates is tried and executed.  
      261 B.C.     Emperor Asoka converts to Buddhism.  
      250 B.C.     Buddhist convocation adopts Pali canon.  
        30 A.D.     Jesus is crucified and resurrected.  
        45 A.D.     St. Paul begins missionary travels.  
        67 A.D.     St. Peter executed in Rome.  
        70 A.D.     Jerusalem is destroyed by the Romans.   
   c. 100 A.D.     Kanishka promotes Mahayana Buddhism.  
      242 A.D.     Mani begins preaching new doctrine.  
      313 A.D.     Constantine legalizes Christianity.  
      323 A.D.     Council of Nicaea adopts doctrine of the trinity.  
      411 A.D.     St. Augustine writes The City of God   
      431 A.D.     Council of Ephesus condemns Nestorianism.  
      432 A.D.     St. Patrick begins mission to Ireland.  
      496 A.D.     Clovis, king of Franks, is baptized.  
      529 A.D.     Benedict founds monastery at Monte Cassino.  
      590 A.D.     Gregory I becomes Pope.  
      596 A.D.     Gregory sends Augustine to England.  
      610 A.D.     Mohammed has vision at Mt. Hira.  
      622 A.D.     Mohammed moves to Medina. (the hegira)   
      632 A.D.     Mohammed dies.  
      650 A.D.     Official version of Koran is determined.  
      658 A.D.     Mu'awiyah establishes Umayyad dynasty.  
      661 A.D.     Caliph Ali is murdered.  
      664 A.D.     Synod of Whitby binds England to Rome.   
      791 A.D.     Dome of the Rock built in Jerusalem.  
      726 A.D.     Byzantine emperor Leo III attacks icons.  
      732 A.D.     Franks defeat Moslems at battle of Tours.  
      749 A.D.     Abbasid dynasty is established at Baghdad.  
      751 A.D.     Arabs defeat Chinese near Samarkand.  
      800 A.D.     Charlemagne crowned Holy Roman Emperor.  
      841 A.D.     Foreign religions persecuted in China.  
      910 A.D.     Monastic reform movement begins at Cluny.  
      960 A.D.     Fatimid caliphate established in Egypt.  
      989 A.D.     Vladimir of Kiev baptized in Orthodox faith.  
    1054 A.D.     Schism between Constantinople and Rome.  
    1055 A.D.     Saljuq Turks capture Baghdad.  
    1086 A.D.     Almoravid dynasty established in Spain.  
    1087 A.D.     Gregory VII absolves Emperor Henry IV.  
    1095 A.D.     Pope Urban II launches First Crusade.  
    1187 A.D.     Saladin takes Jerusalem from Crusaders.  
    1206 A.D.     Moslem state established at Delhi.  
    1273 A.D.     St. Thomas Aquinas writes Summa Theologica.   
    1309 A.D.     Papacy moved to Avignon, France.  
    1377 A.D.     Papacy moved back to Rome.  
    1417 A.D.     Martin V's papal election ends Great Schism.  
    1439 A.D.     Byzantine emperor accepts papal authority.  
    1453 A.D.     Ottoman Turks capture Constantinople.  
    1492 A.D.     Moors expelled from Spain.  
    1517 A.D.     Martin Luther posts 95 Theses on church door.  
    1525 A.D.     Babur founds Mogul dynasty in India.  
    1534 A.D.     Henry VIII founds Church of England.  
    1538 A.D.     Nanak, first Sikh guru, dies.  
    1540 A.D.     Ignatius Loyola founds Society of Jesus.  
    1565 A.D.     Kingdom of Vijayanagar falls to Moslems.  
    1582 A.D.     Mogul Emperor Akbar proclaims new religion.  
    1827 A.D.     Joseph Smith discovers Mormon tablets.  
    1859 A.D.     Charles Darwin publishes Origin of Species.  
    1948 A.D.     Israel reestablished as a Jewish state.  
    1965 A.D.     Paul Twitchell brings Eckankar to West. 
    
 


 1215 A.D.     King John of England signs Magna Carta.  
 1295 A.D.     Marco Polo returns to Italy from China.  
 1341 A.D.     Petrarch crowned poet laureate in Rome.  
 1401 A.D.     Ghiberti wins arts competition in Florence.  
 1454 A.D.     Gutenberg prints copies of Bible.  
 1469 A.D.     Lorenzo de' Medici rules Florence.  
 1492 A.D.     Columbus discovers America.  
 1498 A.D.     Vasco da Gama sails around Africa to India.  
 1503 A.D.     Leonardo da Vinci paints Mona Lisa.  
 1506 A.D.     Bramante appointed architect of St. Peters.  
 1511 A.D.     Portuguese establish base at Malacca.  
 1513 A.D.     Machiavelli begins writing The Prince.  
 1521 A.D.     Cortes conquers Aztec empire.  
 1522 A.D.     Magellan's crew circumnavigates the earth.  
 1530 A.D.     Pizarro invades Peru.  
 1543 A.D.     Copernicus publishes book about solar system.  
 1557 A.D.     Spanish crown is bankrupt.  
 1567 A.D.     Dutch revolt against Spain begins.  
 1583 A.D.     Sir Walter Raleigh's expedition to Virginia.   
 1588 A.D.     English defeat Spanish Armada.  
 1600 A.D.     Elizabeth I charters East India Company.  
 1605 A.D.     Shakespeare writes Macbeth and King Lear.  
 1606 A.D.     Virginia Company is founded.  
 1609 A.D.     Bank of Amsterdam is established.  
 1620 A.D.     English Pilgrims found New England colony.  
 1649 A.D.     Charles I of England is beheaded.  
 1681 A.D.     William Penn receives charter for colony.  
 1687 A.D.     Newton publishes Principia Mathematica.  
 1694 A.D.     Bank of England is established.  
 1709 A.D.     Czar Peter I defeats Swedes at Poltava.  
 1720 A.D.     John Law's Mississippi scheme collapses.  
 1757 A.D.     Clive wins battle of Plassey in India.  
 1759 A.D.     Wolfe defeats Montcalm at battle of Quebec.  
 1769 A.D.     Watt patents invention of steam engine.  
 1776 A.D.     Americans issue Declaration of Independence.  
 1789 A.D.     French Estates-General is convened.  
 1803 A.D.     Jefferson purchases Louisiana from Napoleon.  
 1815 A.D.     Napoleon defeated at battle of Waterloo.  
 1819 A.D.     British Parliament passes First Factory Act.  
 1825 A.D.     Parliament legalizes trade unions.  
 1842 A.D.     Chinese Opium Wars end.  
 1848 A.D.     Gold is discovered in California.  
 1854 A.D.     Admiral Perry reopens Japan.  
 1863 A.D.     Lincoln issues Emancipation Proclamation.  
 1869 A.D.     Last spike driven in transcontinental railroad.  
 1886 A.D.     American workers conduct "May Day" strike.  
 1888 A.D.     Cecil Rhodes gains diamond-mining monopoly.  
 1901 A.D.     Carnegie sells steel company to J.P. Morgan.  
 1914 A.D.     Henry Ford offers $5-a-day minimum wage.  
 1917 A.D.     Bolsheviks seize power in Russia.  
 1929 A.D.     Stock market crashes in New York.  
 1947 A.D.     British grant independence to India and Pakistan. 
 
 
 


 1823 A.D.     Rules infraction leads to game of rugby.  
 1835 A.D.     Barnum exhibits George Washington's "nurse".  
 1851 A.D.     Great Exhibition at Crystal Palace in London.  
 1853 A.D.     Musical drama of "Uncle Tom's Cabin" opens.  
 1854 A.D.     Millard Fillmore leads boat trip up Mississippi.  
 1859 A.D.     Blondin crosses Niagara Falls on tightrope.  
 1869 A.D.     First U.S. intercollegiate football game.   
 1871 A.D.     Barnum organizes "Greatest Show on Earth".  
 1875 A.D.     First Kentucky Derby is run.  
 1876 A.D.     Centennial Exhibition held in Philadelphia.  
 1883 A.D.     Buffalo Bill launches "Wild West Show".  
 1891 A.D.     James Naismith invents game of basketball.  
 1892 A.D.     Sullivan-Corbett heavyweight boxing match.  
 1896 A.D.     Olympic games revived in Athens.  
 1903 A.D.     First baseball "World Series" .  
 1913 A.D.     Notre Dame upsets Army in football game.  
 1915 A.D.     D.W. Griffith's Birth of a Nation opens.  
 1919 A.D.     "Black Sox" baseball scandal.  
 1920 A.D.     First broadcast on commercial radio station.  
 1922 A.D.     BBC receives license to broadcast on radio.  
 1923 A.D.     Houdini escapes from straight jacket while suspended in mid air.  
 1926 A.D.     First U.S. radio network (NBC) established.  
 1927 A.D.     Babe Ruth hits 60 home runs in a season.  
 1931 A.D.     Gambling legalized in Nevada.  
 1932 A.D.     Hollywood premiere of MGM's Grand Hotel.  
 1933 A.D.     Franklin Roosevelt's "fireside chats" on radio.  
 1936 A.D.     Jesse Owens wins gold medals at Olympics.  
 1937 A.D.     First televised sports match.  
 1938 A.D.     Orson Wells broadcast creates Martian scare.  
 1939 A.D.     Atlanta premiere of Gone with the Wind.  
 1943 A.D.     Oklahoma! opens on Broadway.  
 1944 A.D.     Bobbysoxers riot at Frank Sinatra appearance.  
 1946 A.D.     First Cannes international film festival.  
 1947 A.D.     Jackie Robinson signs with Brooklyn Dodgers.  
 1952 A.D.     Cinerama and 3-D movies introduced.  
 1953 A.D.     Birth of Lucille Ball's baby on television.  
 1955 A.D.     Opening of Disneyland park in California.  
 1956 A.D.     Elvis Presley becomes singing sensation.  
 1958 A.D.     The $64,000 Question" quiz show canceled.  
 1960 A.D.     Kennedy-Nixon debate on television.  
 1961 A.D.     FCC chairman calls TV a "vast wasteland".  
 1964 A.D.     Beatles appear on Ed Sullivan show.  
 1967 A.D.     Green Bay Packers win Superbowl I.  
 1969 A.D.     Woodstock and Altamont music festivals.  
 1969 A.D.     First television broadcast from the Moon.  
 1973 A.D.     Billie Jean King-Bobby Riggs tennis match.  
 1974 A.D.     Evel Knieval tries to jump across Snake River.  
 1977 A.D.     "Star Wars" movie debuts.  
 1980 A.D.     Ted Turner starts Cable News Network.  
 1986 A.D.     Geraldo Riviera opens Capone safe on live TV.  
 1990 A.D.     MCA sold to Matsushita.  
 1992 A.D.     Johnny Carson retires from "Tonight Show".  
 1994 A.D.     O.J. Simpson's "suicide" ride in Ford Bronco.  
 1998 A.D.     Mark McGwire-Sammy Sosa home run contest.                  
 
 
 
 
 
  


Ideographic or syllabic writing    

  c. 33rd century B.C.      Sumerians invent writing from commercial inscriptions.   
  c. 31st century B.C.       Egyptian hieroglyphics developed from Sumerian models.   
  c. 25th century B.C.      Harappan culture of Indus Valley has ideographic script.   
  c. 19th century B.C.      Babylonian cuneiform adapted from Sumerian script.   
  c. 19th century B.C.      Chinese develop writing, perhaps independently.   
  c. 17th century B.C.      Minoan "Linear-A" script adapted from hieroglyphics.   
  c. 15th century B.C.      Hittite cuneiform adapted from Babylonian writing.   
  c. 12th century B.C.      Assyrian cuneiform is adapted from Babylonian writing.   
  c.   9th century B.C.      Chinese ìta chuanî script is compiled.   
  c.   6th century B.C.      Early Persian cuneiform influenced by neo-Babylonian script.   
  c.   5th century B.C.      Cuneiform dies out as Babylonian speech falls into disuse.   
       3rd century B.C.      "Li shu" Chinese script developed by the emperorís minister.   
  c.   3rd century A.D.     Mayans of Central America have an ideographic script.   
  c.   4th century A.D.     Japanese develop script from Korean and Chinese models.   


II   


Alphabetic writing     

  c. 16th century B.C.    First alphabetic script, North Semitic, appears in Palestine.    
  c. 13th century B.C.     Phoenician alphabet derived from North Semitic prototype.    
  c. 11th century B.C.     Early Hebrew script derived from North Semitic prototype.    
  c. 11th century B.C.     Greek alphabet derived from Phoenician script.    
  c. 10th century B.C.     Aramaic alphabet derived from North Semitic script.    
  c.   8th century B.C.     South Semitic script introduced to Yemen.    
  c.   8th century B.C.     Etruscan alphabet derived from Greek.    
  c.  7th century B.C.      Latin alphabet derived from Etruscan and Greek sources.    
  c.  6th century B.C.      Brahmi script, derived from Aramaic, introduced in India.    
  c.  3rd century B.C.      Later Hebrew script derived from Aramaic.    
  c.  2nd century B.C.     Nabataean alphabet derived from Aramaic script.    
  c.  2nd century A.D.     Coptic script of Egypt derived from Greek.    
  c.  3rd century A.D.     Runic script of Northern Europe derived from Etruscan.    
  c.  4th century A.D.     Gothic script of Bulgaria derived from Greek and Latin.    
  c.  4th century A.D.     Gupta script of India derived from Brahmi.    
  c.  5th century A.D.     Arabic script is derived from Nabataean.    
  c   5th century A.D.     Grantha script of India derived from Gupta.    
  c.  8th century A.D.     Kavi script of Java is derived from Grantha.    
  c.  8th century A.D.     Frankish Carolingian script derived from Latin.    
  c.  9th century A.D.     Glagolitic script, based on Greek, introduced in Bulgaria.    
  c.  9th century A.D.     Cyrillic script in Bulgaria is derived from Greek uncial.   

    
III   


Printing     

  6th century A.D.    Chinese engravers master art of wood-block printing.    
11th century A.D.     Pi Sheng, Chinese alchemist, prints with movable type.    
15th century A.D.     Korean king undertakes massive printing project.    
    1428 A.D.             Laurens Janzoon, prints prayer book with wooden fonts.    
    1454 A.D.             Johann Gutenberg of Mainz prints Mazarin Bible.    
    1498 A.D.             Aldus Manutius publishesset of Aristotle's writings.    
    1516 A.D.             Johannes Froben prints Erasmus' translation of New Testament.    
    1583 A.D.             Elzevir family of Holland publishes its first book.    
    1609 A.D.             First newspaper is printed in Germany.    
    1702 A.D.             Daily Courant becomes England's first daily newspaper.    
    1728 A.D.             Benjamin Franklin founds Pennsylvania Gazette newspaper.    
    1755 A.D.             Dr. Samuel Johnson publishes an English dictionary.    
    1803 A.D.             Fourdriner papermaking machine installed in London.    
    1810 A.D.             Friedrich Koenig applies steam power to printing press.    
    1821 A.D.             Saturday Evening Post begins publication.    
    1847 A.D.             Richard March Hoe (USA) designs rotary press.    
    1874 A.D.             Remington typewriter put on the market.    
    1886 A.D.             Mergenthaler's linotype machine installed at New York Tribune.    
    1922 A.D.             Reader's Digest, Time magazine begin publication.    
    1935 A.D.             Electric typewriter comes on the market.   


IV   


Photography    

  1553     Giovanni Battista della Porta describes camera obscura in book.    
  1727     Johann Schulze discovers that light darkens silver-nitrate solution.    
  1802     Davy and Wedgewood make silhouettes on silver-nitrate coated paper.    
  1816     Joseph Nicephore Niepce makes film negative on coated paper.    
  1826     Niepce produces first photograph on metal plate.    
  1839     Louis Daguerre perfects daguerreotype photography.    
  1861     Matthew Brady begins photographing scenes from U.S. Civil War.    
  1888     George Eastman develops roll film.    
  1938     Harold Edgerton perfects electronic flash tube.    
  1947     Polaroid markets quick-developing film.    
   

Electric telegraph     

  1832     Samuel F.B. Morse learns of Ampere's idea for electric communication.    
  1844     Morse sends telegraphed message between Baltimore and Washington.    
  1866     Telegraph cable crossing Atlantic Ocean is laid.    
  1872     J.B. Stearns invents method of duplex telegraphy.   

Telephone    

  1876     Alexander Graham Bell invents and demonstrates telephone.    
  1877     Thomas Edison and others develop carbon telephone transmitter.    
  1915     First coast-to-coast telephone conversation in the United States.    
  1983     MCI places order for 90,000 miles of fiber optic cable.    
  1984     Court ruling ends A T & T monopoly of telephone service.    
   

Phonograph, Tape Recorder     

  1877     Thomas Edison invents the phonograph.    
  1888     Emile Berliner invents gramophone disks.    
  1898     Valdemar Poulsen discovers that sound changes magnetic pattern in wires.    
  1900     Poulsen invents telegraphone.    
  1930s    German firms develop magnetic tape for sound recordings.    
  1940s    Tape recorder sold in the United States.    
  1948     Long-playing records introduced.    
  1963     Phillips develops audiotape cassettes.    
   

Motion Pictures, Video Recorders    

  1824     Peter Mark Roget proposes theory of persistent vision.    
  1872     Eadweard Maybridge does photographic studies of animals in motion.    
  1888     William Dickson, Edison's assistant, invents the kinetoscope.    
  1894     First kinetoscope parlour opened in Ottawa.    
  1895     Lumiere Brothers of Paris develop film projector.    
  1900     Georges Melies creates film with a story line.    
  1903     Bronco Billy Anderson stars in the Great Train robbery.    
  1906     J. Stuart Blockton creates first animated film.    
  1908     Film wildcatters move to southern California.    
  1914     D.W. Griffith releases Birth of a Nation.    
  1927     Al Jolson stars in the Jazz Singer, first motion picture with sound.    
  1928     Disney's Mickey Mouse stars in Steamboat Willie.    
  1929     First Oscar Awards from Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.    
  1932     Technicolor used for the first time in motion pictures.    
  1951     Prototype of videotape recorder built by Armour Research Foundation.    
  1953     Ampex introduces commercial video recorders.    
  1975     Sony introduces Betamax videocassette recorder.    
  1976     Disney and MCA sue Sony for copyright infringement.    
  1983     U.S. Supreme Court allows videotaping of televised films.    
  1980s    Video rental business begins.    
   

Radio    

  1873     James Clark Maxwell writes treatise on electromagnetic waves.    
  1888     Heinrich Hertz experiments with radio waves.    
  1895     Guglielmo Marconi broadcasts letter "S" in Morse code by radio.    
  1901     Marconi broadcasts letter "S" across Atlantic ocean.    
  1904     Reginald A. Fessender transmits speech by radio.    
  1904     John A. Fleming invents vacuum tube to detect radio waves.    
  1907     Lee DeForest invents audion tube to amplify radio signals.    
  1912     David Sarnoff receives radio message from the sinking Titanic.    
  1913     Edwin H. Armstrong patents way to amplify radio signals.    
  1918     Armstrong invents super heterodyne circuit.    
  1919     Radio Corporation of America is formed.    
  1920     First commercial radio station, KDKA, begins broadcasting.    
  1921     First paid radio commercial.    
  1925     Edwin Armstrong begins work on FM broadcasting system.    
  1926     First radio network, NBC, is formed.    
  1934     Robert Watson-Watt invents radar device.    
  1948     Transistor developed at Bell Laboratories.    
   

Television    

  1861     Joseph May notices that sunlight affects electrical resistance of selenium.    
  1884     Paul Nipkow develops mechanical television device.    
  1897     Karl Ferdinand Braun invents cold-cathode "Braun" tube.    
  1908     Campbell Swinton writes paper on possibility of "distant electric vision".    
  1923     John Logie Baird patents television system with Nipkow disk.    
  1923     Vladimir Zworykin invents iconoscope, a workable television camera.    
  1926     Baird and Jenkins demonstrate television with mechanical scanning device.    
  1927     Philo T. Farnsworth patents "image dissector", a more advanced camera.    
  1928     Zworykin patents television system with electronic scanning.    
  1933     In London, EMI applies for permission to begin television broadcasts.    
  1934     Farnsworth demonstrates electronic television system in Philadelphia.    
  1936     London Television Service begins regular broadcasts.    
  1938     First sports telecast takes place in London (a soccer match).    
  1939     RCA unveils U.S. television broadcasting at 1939 New York World Fair.    
  1949     John Cameron Swayze becomes anchor of Camel News Caravan.    
  1951     First sitcom, "I Love Lucy", aired on U.S. commercial television.    
  1953     F.C.C. approves system of broadcasting color television.    
  1960     Televised Presidential debate between Kennedy and Nixon.    
  1980     Ted Turner starts Cable News Network (CNN).    
  1991     The STAR network begins Asian broadcasts.   


V   

Calculators and Computers     

  1617     John Napier shows how to multiply and divide using rods or bones.    
  1642     Blaise Pascal invents adding machine.    
  1671     G.W. von Leibniz invents adding machine with geared wheels.    
  1801     Joseph Jacquard uses card-controlled looms to weave designs into cloth.    
  1820     Charles X. Thomas introduces commercial calculating machine.    
  1835     Charles Babbage invents "Analytic Engine", foreshadowing computers.    
  1859     George Boole publishes treatise on binary algebra.    
  1867     Charles Sanders Peirce applies Boolean logic to electric circuits.    
  1872     Lord Kelvin develops analog computer to predict tides.    
  1886     Herman Hollerith conceives idea of using punched cards for calculations.    
  1890     Hollerith's ideas successfully applied to work of the U.S. Census.    
  1911     Hollerith forms company which later becomes IBM.    
  1937     George Stibitz creates electrical circuit to apply Boolean algebra.    
  1939     IBM engineers and Howard Aiken of Harvard start on the Mark I computer.    
  1943     Alan Turing's "Colossus" computer breaks the German Enigma code.    
  1946     Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC) computer is built.    
  1946     Von Neumann, Goldstine, and Burks publish paper on computer concepts.    
  1949     ILLIAC I built at University of Illinois employing the Von Neumann design.    
  1951     UNIVAC I machine installed at U.S. Census Bureau.    
  1956     Computer beats human player in chess game.    
  1957     IBM unveils FORTRAN programming language.    
  1959     Jack St. Clair Kilby of Texas Instruments invents integrated circuits.    
  1960     Livermore Advanced Research Computer (LARC) built with transistors.    
  1969     U.S. Department of Defense creates ARPANET computer network.    
  1971     Engineers at Intel invent the microprocessor.    
  1972     Nolan Bushnell introduces "Pong" video game.    
  1972     Ray Tomlinson sends first E-mail using @ in address.    
  1974     First personal computers introduced.    
  1974     First time that a bar code scanned groceries at a supermarket.    
  1976     Cray Research sells first supercomputer.    
  1977     A glove device to facilitate computer interaction is patented.    
  1977     George Lucas' computer effects in Star Wars revolutionize filmmaking.    
  1979     Pac-man video game first sold in Japan.    
  1980     Dan Bricklin and Dan Flystra write software for VisiCalc spreadsheet.    
  1981     IBM introduces personal computer, using Microsoft operating system.    
  1982     French postal and telegraph service hooks up nation on Minitel network.    
  1983     Internet emerges as ARPANET splits civilian from military networks.    
  1984     Apple Computer introduces its Macintosh machine including a mouse.    
  1985     Microsoft introduces its first version of Windows.    
  1991     World Wide Web begins.    
  1992     Michelangelo computer virus detected in the United States.    
  2000     Widespread computer glitch, Y2K, expected with new millennium. .  
 
 
Marvin Harris and the Cultural Materialism


Introduction 

Lacking commitment to any single theory, many social scientists today spin out 
seemingly endless explanations and mini theories that contribute little 
understanding to what is going on. This site is old-fashioned in the sense that 
it is openly committed to a theoretical scheme. Cultural materialism is an 
ecological- evolutionary systems theory that attempts to account for the origin, 
maintenance and change of sociocultural systems. 

The foundation of Harris' theory of Cultural Materialism is that a society's 
mode of production (technology and work patterns, especially in regard to food) 
and mode of reproduction (population level and growth) in interaction with the 
natural environment has profound effects on sociocultural stability and change. 
Societies are systems, Harris asserts, and widespread social practices and 
beliefs must be compatible with the infrastructures of society (the modes of 
production and reproduction and their interaction with the environment).  The 
infrastructure represents the ways in which a society regulates both the type 
and amount of resources needed to sustain the society.  

A good deal of Harris' work, therefore, is concerned with explaining cultural 
systems (norms, ideologies, values, beliefs) and widespread social institutions 
and practices through the use of population, production, and ecological 
variables.  The infrastructure represent technologies and practices by which 
sociocultural systems adapt to their environments.  Because this activity is so 
crucial to the survival of individuals and sociocultural systems, Harris 
maintains, the adoption of these technologies will have tremendous impact on 
human institutions and cultural values and beliefs.  

Harris fully explores the impact of productive and reproductive factors on 
social institutions (such as the family, the workplace, religion) and widespread 
ideals, ideologies and beliefs (feminism, eating taboos, cow worship). However, 
contrary to some assertions, Harris does not claim that structural and 
superstructural factors are merely dependent upon a society's infrastructure. 
Rather, he sees structural and superstructural factors in interaction with 
population level and production processes. 

Harris' framework is capable of integrating a diverse range of theoretical 
insights and empirical observations within its scope.  In particular, Harris' 
concept of structure and superstructure can be further developed to incorporate 
more diverse sociological and anthropological theory (see Elwell, 1999).  But 
his insistence that relationships between population and production are at the 
base of all sociocultural systems, and that this base must necessarily have a 
profound effect on the rest of the system, are the core of Cultural Materialist 
theory. 