
Unless I say otherwise you know everything that Morphus knows about a topic...

q: What are the Gates of Chronos

	They are a series of patterns created by several beings in conjuncture, 
including Labalas Eneroth, Avatar of Correllan and Time Lord.  You don't know all
that much about them.

q: Is it possible that Catbird is unconciously using the Gates of Chronos?

	Anything is possible... but no, it is very unlikely.  She might be managing 
to slip through the Gates and not be stopped by them.  They as much ward time and
space as control it.

q: What do I know about the Book of WInds ?

	It is written by one of the first elves!  It is said one the Elder Ten wrote
its first five chapters called the Five Songs of the Winds.  It contains a preface that is said to be 876 pages long, and supposed to reveal the purpose of elven creation. 
Your father has didainfully shot down this rumor saying that the preface only hints
at vague prophesies concerning the purpose of the elves... dozens of authors over 
millenium have added to it....

q: Does Mordanith know what a Greater Dark is ?

	Yes.  It is one of the highest, and most powerful form of 
elemental darkness known.  They are not all that bright and very reactive-
they haed for the nearest, brightest light source and try to destroy
it.  What makes them scary is their power- average power- 3000 -5000
points of darkness; average size- 200 meters high!

q: What do the Kerestaen ward or watch for ?

	You have heard that they ward and watch for the blance of humanities
power and the powers of darkness to make sure that neither side overpowers the 
other.  You think there is more to it than that but it is a well-kept secret.

q: Concentrating on Kheldar/Morphus's history for a second. 
>It is unlikely, in my mind, that Kheldar and his group have made 
>no impression on history. With all I know ofhis master, his endeavors and
>their locations, his companions, and his skills. Can I get a good fix 
>on his Historical Niche ?

	Your sense of human history isn't all that it could be.  You think he and his
friends have NOT had a major impact on the Elves.  You think Falstaff and he
date back to the pre-Purge days of  over 500 years ago, but probably after the
founding of Marden 1800 years ago.  I am not exactly sure what you mean by this
so please ask more specifically.  Falstaff and he belong to a group of mages known
historically as the Grey Wanderers.  They were NOT specifically Abjurationists, but
most were, and they fought against the forces of Death and Chaos... they did not always
fight with the Elves.  These men had ambiguous morals, and goals, they entered an area,
wreaked their changes, and then left again.  It is they, and the group of individuals 
called the RING that made the Wall of Thelaya.  They had a leader who was known as the 
BLADE OF STONE that, it is believed, may have caused the Mage Purge by assassinating 
a Death Lord that had taken a country from a weak King.  The Death Knight was a 
creature of darkness and great power but the evil of the purge may have done more 
damage.  By slaying the Death Lord the Blade of Stone released one hundred 
Faer-Han that were trapped by the Black Cloud's wizards, and he broke the hold Death
was gaining on the entrances to Faerie.  It also had major effects on the prime
Material but you never studied that.  
	It is a historical hot subject as to whether or not that was just an 
inevitable spark in the power pool, or did the BLADE OF STONE truly not care about 
the consequences of his actions.  

q: When was the breach that Morphus was repairing ?

	Unknown.

q: What is the RING ? 

	The RING is a group of humans who have achieved a very high state of order 
and are bound to the force of nature.   Despite this they serve a balance between 
Decay and DEath and Life and Nature.  They are pro-world, possibly linked to the 
Kerestaen.  There are many historical links between the RING and the Grey Wanderers.

q: Is it possible that the secondary ward placed on Morphus is 
will magic ?

	Yes.  It is also Abjurational - Warding mucho grande.


q: Do I remember any mention of Falstaff saving Tyriontill  from a raver

	Yes.  One of the Grey Wanderers- Known as the White Mage- fought the 
Air Raver Oleanth who tried to link to Tyriontill and absorb him.  The White Mage
is said to be a Binder and a Willworker of some Power.  
	The White Mage and The Blade of Stone were said to often be at odds.  The 
Ice Wolf and the Stormlord were other Grey Wanderers that were rumored or storied
to interact with the elves.


q: Now that I know which Vordak this is (Guards the Gates of Chronos, He who
>brought the Book of Winds back, etc..) can I figure out who else has summoned
>him.

	Not a chance.  Your lore of the Vordock is much to small.  This is a
BIG, and super unusually, powerful Vordock.  You think your summoning probably 
should not have called one so powerful.


q: How easily cold the Vordak have mistaken Morphus's pattern for that of
>a dragon ?

	Unlikely.  You think Morphus' mind doesn't look anything like a Dragon's.


q: I get the impression that Kheldar may have done something to help
>initiate the original purge. Do I remember the names of any of those who
>did so ? Wh may have performed some heedless action and endangered or
>killed others ?

	Yes.  The Ice Wolf is said to havehad something to do with the orignal purge 
but it was primarily, according to conservative elven scholars, the Blade of Stone that
caused the Purge.  Others argue the "it was inevitable, and the Grey Wanderers did 
what they had to" argument.  
	The Lord of The Dorian Empire Chepu Akanasi was the first major Lord
to declear Purge.  The rest of the human world quickly followed suit.  It happened
fast- irrationally fast!  It was probably aided by external forces but noone knows who.

q: By Morpus's past memories I can guessthat Morphus has been keyed 
>to ABjuration in the Human manner. Is it possible that he has incorporated
>that key into himself ? 
  
	Yes.  It seems almost certain that he has been keyed.  It is also possible, 
though less so that he incorporated the Key into himself.

q: Is there any quiet way for me to contact Lord Carolyn of the High Elves? Does he 
>accept messages from Itinerate Wizards ?

	Pray.  Not usually!  A priest of Labelas is a likelier bet if you still 
wanted to contact a higher up.

q: How does one break the connection between a Greater Dark and the 
>Dark Mage controlling it ? Does the Sunbane have any effect on Greater
>Dark ?

	Kill the Dark Mage.  Destroy the material pattern of the control(there will
always be one).  Shape it out of existence.  Tear it up with a power attack.
	Yes, the sunbane effects them but they are so strong they can fight it.

q: Can a greater Death dodamge  to a FaerHan-Quenyan hald breed ?

	Only physical damage.  Its illusions and enchantments would be at half 
effective against you, and its death attacks would not work.  

q: Is there enough left to Tyriontil to communicate with ? 

	Yes and no.  There can be slow translated communication.  There are experts 
at that process.

q: The stone of fire is a prophetic allusion, does it refer to the 
Fire Mountain ?

[71]What reference have you had the stone of fire?  Please tell me where you 
are coming from?

q: What were the causes that triggered the purge ?

See above.  Way above.

q: What is destroying the Linking Ward in the Hall of kings ?
>Is it likely that this only one of severallinking wards ?

	Hard to say.  Hard to say.  There are probably other linking wards.


	There you go, Jim.... answer the questions and then send the answers to me and we can deal with it later.  Send a copy to Chris unless you are intending to keep this
data secret.  

							Alex
