 
  





Tohoku > Iwate > Hiraizumi







Hiraizumi Hiraizumi knew glory. The supply center for most of classical Japan's 
gold bullion and set in the magnificence of central Tohoku, the town was the 
seat of the powerful northern Fujiwara, a warrior clan that carved out a huge 
territory that they ruled as a virtually autonomous kingdom. For centuries, 
unruly offspring of court nobles and troublesome generals were sent to the 
northern hinterlands, where they were expected to keep the uncivilized 
barbarians at bay while keeping out of trouble themselves. In fact, one of these 
generals, Sakanoue no Tamuramaro, was first to receive the title Sei-I-Taishogun 
("Barbarian-quelling General") when he drove off marauding bands of indigenous 
tribesmen in the 9th century. Later in the same century, the great priest Ennin 
visited Hiraizumi, a backwoods outpost at the time, and built Chuson-ji, a 
temple where the forgotten warriors of Tohoku could find spiritual respite.   In 
1089 Kiyohira Fujiwara became the head of the clan. Struck with the similarity 
of Hiraizumi's topography with that of Kyoto, he decided to enlarge the outpost 
and build his capital here. He adorned the town with villas and shrines and 
rebuilt Chuson-ji into a magnificent temple with over three dozen main halls, a 
number of magnificent pagodas, and the golden Konjiki-do, a hall where he 
personally worshipped Amida Buddha.   The clan ruled its northern enclave, 
growing more and more prosperous, for about 100 years until court intrigue and 
political treachery laid it low. In the mid 1100s, Yoshitsune Minamoto, a 
political refugee from Kyoto, petitioned Hidehira Fujiwara, the ruler of 
Hiraizumi, for sanctuary. Impressed with the young warrior's spirit, Hidehira 
welcomed him, even going so far as to make him an unofficial adopted son. 
Yoshitsune's father was killed in a fierce battle with the Taira clan, 
traditional rivals of the Minamoto, and the young man, who was spared on the 
condition that he become a monk, vowed vengeance. When he learned that an army 
had been raised by his half-brother Yoritomo, who was destined to be the first 
Minamoto shogun, Yoshitsune offered his services and proved to be a magnificent 
military leader. He defeated the Taira once and for all at the famous battle of 
Dannoura. Unfortunately, Yoshitsune was too successful, and his jealous brother 
Yoritomo, who suspected him of treason, plotted his downfall. Unwittingly, 
Yoshitsune had accepted an Imperial title from the retired emperor Go-Shirakawa, 
an act forbidden by Yoritomo. This set the stage for treachery.   Yoshitsune ran 
from his vengeful brother, first to Yoshino and then by secret trails known only 
to the mystic mountain priests, the yamabushi, to his childhood refuge, 
Hiraizumi. Welcomed at first by his aged stepfather, Hidehira, who soon died, he 
was reluctantly given sanctuary by the lord's son, Yasuhira. Meanwhile Yoritomo, 
learning of his brother's whereabouts and seeing an opportunity to bring this 
rich northern region under his domain, sent a huge army against Yasuhira 
Fujiwara. In an attempt to gain favor with the shogun, and to save his fiefdom, 
Yasuhira turned on Yoshitsune, who made a desperate last stand along with nine 
brave samurai. When their cause was indeed hopeless, Yoshitsune committed 
seppuku, while a loyal comrade dispatched his wife and children, set fire to 
their home, and finally cast himself into the flames. Yoshitsune's head was 
rescued from the flames by Yasuhira's men, who sent it to Kamakura as a war 
prize for Yoritomo. Unfortunately for Yasuhira, Yoritomo was undeterred and 
continued his military campaign, laying siege to Hiraizumi and driving the 
hapless Yasuhira to Hokkaido, where he, too, was betrayed by a retainer. 
Thereafter, Hiraizumi faded into obscurity. Sights Your senses are both soothed 
and stimulated as you walk along the steep tree-lined path leading to Chuson-ji. 
Originally founded in 850 by Priest Ennin, Chuson-ji became the jewel of 
Hiraizumi when it was expanded by the Fujiwara in the 12th century. After their 
fall, the temple lost its main financial support and fell into disrepair. A 
devastating fire in 1337 razed every important building except the Konjiki-do 
and the Kyozo.   The Konjiki-do ("Golden Hall") is now encased in a fireproof 
building. The Amida Trinity is the main object of worship in the hall and is 
flanked by a number of jizo and dewa kings. The bodies of the first three 
Fujiwara lords, Kiyohira, Motohira, and Hidehira, were entombed beneath the 
Amida Trinity. In 1962, they were exhumed and studied. Plaster casts were made 
of the bodies, and the tombs yielded a rich collection of jewelry, fans, robes, 
and other personal items that are on display in the Sankozo (Treasure House). 
The Konjiki-do is open daily 0800-1700, admission ¥800, which includes admission 
to the Sankozo and the Kyozo (Sutra Library), renowned for its magnificent 
statue of Monju Bosatsu, who triumphantly rides a fierce lion.   Motsu-ji 
Temple, also founded by Priest Ennin, was a match for Chuson-ji in both grandeur 
and fame. Rebuilt by the Fujiwara in the 12th century, its main building was 
fashioned after the magnificent Byodo-in of Uji, a sacred town south of Kyoto. 
Motsu-ji was also consumed by war and fire, and all of its halls have been lost. 
Fortunately, the temple's Jodo-Teien, "Paradise Garden", open daily 0830-1700, 
admission ¥500 (free to youth hostel guests, see following), has survived. The 
garden is the finest example of this luxurious Heian style of landscaping extant 
in Japan. A treasure hall on the grounds exhibits artifacts preserved from the 
Motsu-ji's glory days.


   