Tailor-made skin from 'ink' printer
Rebecca Camber 

BREAKTHROUGH: Prof Derby holds a tissue scaffold used in development of new skin 	

SCIENTISTS at Manchester University have developed a printer able to produce 
human skin to help wounds heal.

It could be used on patients who have suffered burns and disfigurements. With 
more research it could even replace broken bones.

Using the same principle as an ink-jet printer, experts are able to take skin 
cells from a patient's body, multiply them, then print out a tailor-made strip 
of skin, ready to sew on to the body. The wound's dimensions are entered into 
the printer to ensure a perfect fit.

The printer, which takes up an area equivalent to three filing cabinets, could 
see the end of traditional skin and bone grafts. 

Scientists at the university's School of Materials have already successfully 
created skin and believe they will soon be able to create bone and cartilage. 

Similar printers are being developed in Japan and the US, but the Manchester 
team is hoping to beat its competitors by being the first to start clinical 
trials on patients.

Team leader Professor Brian Derby says that they are the only team in the world 
to work out how to print human cells without destroying them in the process. He 
said: "There is a fighting chance that something could come of this in five 
years if there were clinical trials. 

"It's not like printing a sheet of paper. We can print a few millimetres in 
depth and build it up layer-upon-layer until, in principle, we could produce 
bone fragments the size of a golf ball.

"It is difficult for a surgeon to reconstruct any complex disfiguring of the 
face using CT scans, but with this technology we are able to build a fragment 
which will fit exactly. We can place cells in any designed position to grow 
tissue or bone."

For the last two years, researchers have been testing the printer using human 
cell samples taken from patients having hip implants at the Manchester Royal 
Infirmary.

The cells are put into a special printer ink liquid and artificially multiplied. 

Then, the printer prints the cells on to a plastic surface, which acts like a 
scaffold to support the cells. Experts say that the plastic could then be 
surgically attached to the damaged part of the body and the plastic would 
dissolve naturally, allowing the body to use the strip of cells to repair the 
injury. 

The printer would revolutionise current treatments, which are based on grafting 
skin or bone from other parts of the body or replacing broken bones with metal 
plates. These carry carry a risk of scarring and possible rejection by the body.

But Professor Derby said that they are still working out how to print cells on 
to the 3D plastic scaffolds to produce bone or cartilage. 

He said: "In theory, you could print the scaffolding to create an organ in a 
day, but we are not quite there yet."