Skip to main content Guardian Unlimited

Read today's paper Sign in | Register  	Go to:  Guardian UnlimitedLife Home
This week 				Dispatch 				Opinion 
Interview 				Bad science 				Far out 				Last 
word 				Online 				Talk


Feature

 Search

 



		In the Valley of Life, oil is death to the art of a lost civilisation

Hammers threaten rock carvings that show a corner of the Sahara was not always a 
desert. By John Bohannon

Thursday February 10, 2005 The Guardian

It is hard to imagine how dry the desert is until you have gone for a stroll in 
the Sahara. After a couple of hours' walk across this lunar landscape, tracking 
along the steep escarpment of the Messak Settafet plateau, a paste of salt, 
sand, and sweat forms on every square inch of exposed skin.

Halfway up the slope, picking his way through a giant's playpen of boulders, 
Hassan Ahmed Breki stops, unwraps his long, white headscarf, and runs a finger 
along lines carved into a rock surface. Here, out in the open for all to see, is 
one of Libya's national treasures: rock engravings, some possibly dating back 
9,000 years or more, created by a mysterious, prehistoric culture.

The graceful forms that emerge beneath Hassan's hand - humans among elephants, 
crocodiles, giraffes and hippopotamuses - reveal what scientists have now 
confirmed: rather than barren and dessicated, it was once lush and green here at 
Wadi al-Hayat (the Valley of Life, also known as Wadi al-Ajal) in the Fezzan 
region of south-west Libya.

Scattered along the slope, taking photographs, measurements, and recording the 
global coordinates of each piece of rock art by GPS, is a team of British 
researchers led by Tertia Barnett, an archaeologist working for English 
Heritage. Along with Hassan, an archaeologist from the Libyan Department of 
Antiquities in Tripoli, the team are working through their holiday with an 
urgency that might seem unusual considering the ancient subject matter. But the 
search for Libya's more lucrative treasure, petroleum, could spell doom for the 
rock art. Criss-crossing the desert are seismic survey lines where enormous 
hammers have been used to ping the underlying rock layers in search of oil 
deposits. These boulder-shattering blows and the construction of roads and 
pipelines are expected to increase exponentially now that international 
sanctions have been lifted from the country. Advertiser links Winsor Pilates -
Official Site

Reach physical and mental health while sculpting your body... winsorpilates.com 
Core Secrets by Brooke and Gunnar

Learn the moves that help Brooke Burke get results and keep... coresecrets.com 
eDiets.com - Official Site

Let eDiets create a diet and fitness plan customized just... ediets.com

As if this weren't enough pressure, other obstacles keep appearing. The entire 
trip was jeopardised when their 26kg laser, used to take 3D pictures of 
engravings, was held up in Libyan customs for several days due to embargo-era 
red tape. One of the laser experts, Kate Devlin, from the University of Bristol, 
was completely incapacitated by what later turned out to be an infection of 
parasitic cryptosporidiosis protozoa. And in one hair-raising episode, the 
team's truck was stuck deep in the Sea of Sand. But it is all worth it, says 
Barnett, who is working against the clock to document and study engravings that 
could be lost within a few years.

Seen from the plateau, the ever-shifting dunes loom to the north, and in between 
lies the flat expanse of a long-extinct lake. One thing unifies the millennia of 
human history that have taken place here, says team member Nick Brooks, a 
climatologist at the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research and cofounder of 
the Saharan studies programme at the University of East Anglia. "It's all about 
water."

Before the last Ice Age, the Sahara was even larger and more inhospitable than 
it is today. Then, some 10,000 years ago, a shift in climate brought rainfall. 
In the ensuing years of plenty, a pastoral way of life thrived. The desert came 
back with a vengeance about 3,000 years ago and, as the remaining surface water 
supplies dwindled, the inhabitants were forced to dig for it below the ground.

A better understanding of how people adapted to these drastic environmental 
changes is more than academic, says Brooks. It has profound relevance to our own 
future, with climate changes forecast for the coming centuries and the 
developing world particularly hard hit. "In many ways our options will be more 
limited than those of the early Saharans," he says. They relied on mass 
migration and an adaptable diet to cope with the changes. "Mass migration is 
less possible today due to large populations and national borders."

Perhaps the best insight we have into the culture of the prehistoric Saharans is 
the rock art they left behind. But this is a field in its infancy, says Barnett. 
So far, dating the engravings is "extremely difficult" and determining what 
these images actually meant to the people who inscribed them will require many 
years of study, if we can ever know.

But how much time remains for Libya's rock art? "Oil exploration is indeed a 
problem," says Sa'ad Abdul Aziz, director of the nearby Germa Museum who 
coordinates archaeological research for the Department of Antiquities. Aziz 
admits there are very few Libyan archaeologists and none who specialise in 
prehistory.

"The situation is rather bleak," says Professor David Mattingly, an 
archaeologist at the University of Leicester with 25 years' experience in Libya. 
A plan for a system of national parks that would protect the most vulnerable 
areas has been on the table for years, he says, but with little progress. "The 
major problem is that the Department of Antiquities is under-resourced." The 
lifting of the embargo could in principle provide the funds needed to preserve 
and protect the country's prehistoric relics.

One way forward is for Libya to make the rock art a source of pride, as Britain 
has done with Stonehenge. "It would be a shame if this sustainable resource were 
sacrificed for the sake of short-term development," says Brooks. After all, with 
10,000 years already weathered, "archaeology and heritage-based tourism will 
outlast the oil".

· John Bohannon is a contributor to Science magazine

· What did you think of this article? Mail your responses to life@guardian.co.uk 
and include your name and address.


Printable version | Send it to a friend | Save story








	
Guardian Unlimited © Guardian Newspapers Limited 2005
